IoT devices play a fundamental role in the machine learning (ML) application pipeline, as they collect rich data for model training using sensors. However, this process can be affected by uncontrollable variables that introduce errors into the data, resulting in a higher computational cost to eliminate them. Thus, selecting the most suitable algorithm for this pre-processing step on-device can reduce ML model complexity and unnecessary bandwidth usage for cloud processing. Therefore, this work presents a new sensor taxonomy with which to deploy data pre-processing on an IoT device by using a specific filter for each data type that the system handles. We define statistical and functional performance metrics to perform filter selection. Experimental results show that the Butterworth filter is a suitable solution for invariant sampling rates, while the Savi–Golay and medium filters are appropriate choices for variable sampling rates.  Gausian and Savi–Golay filters removed the noise better than the other algorithms. However, the Gausian modifies the signal output significantly. Additionally, the average does not fit with these types of electrical signals due to the sizes of their windows affecting the signal with few samples of data. Therefore, medium and Savi–Golay can be applied to these sensors. Table 6 represents the statistical analysis, and Figure 7 shows the graphical results. Sensor performance metrics: They have poor repeatability and reproducibility because UV rays do not have considerable variability during the day. Moreover, CO2 can increase exponentially in fires, smoking zones, etc., but it needs a few hours to normalize. As a
result, the sensor has restrictions concerning returning to the initial state. Figure 7 shows the smoothing graphical results of both sensors. 5.5. real tests Sensors were evaluated under natural conditions to test each filter selected. In addition, we compare the voltage obtained through sensors using a multimeter KEYSIGHT DIGITAL MULTIMETER U1282A, which has a 0.025% voltage accuracy. Therefore, for a better understanding of each metric’s result, four levels of evaluation were established for the sensors: (i) excellent, (ii) good, (iii), normal, and (iv) poor. Table 7 shows the results obtained. Finally, we obtained the system response time for each sensor with the filter deployed on the device. For example, the Butterworth filter takes 2.5 ms to process an array with 300 samples, the Savi–Golay takes 1.2 ms to process the same number of samples, and the medium filter takes 0.68 ms. Therefore, this pre-processing technique is a suitable solution to run in real-time scenarios when the IoT system can define threads for each procedure to reduce the time response of each task. Additionally, filters have a small footprint in memory, leaving enough space to run the IoT application. 6. conclusions and future works This work introduced a new taxonomy of sensors focused on data pre-processing on-device to upload reliable data to the cloud. Furthermore, filter implementation criteria were established to prevent erroneous data from being part of the ML model. We now present the conclusions of this work:
• This taxonomy of sensors is appropriate for the new trend of executing some ML stages on-device. Therefore, this work prevents data that do not describe the phenomenon being studied from being part of the ML model. Thus, the sampling frequency used in the sensors is a fundamental part of implementing filters. • The proposed methodology demonstrates which filter is adequate and does not deform the original signal. • Performance metrics in real environments define the ability to reduce noise and provide new trends to improve this process for coming sensors. • We declare the Butterworth filter suitable for analog sensors with invariant sampling rates. Savi–Golay fits analog sensors with variant sampling rates. The average filter is adequate for digital pulse train sensors. Regarding communication protocol sensors, Savi–Golay and medium filters remove noise and provide improved signal for the proposed data gathering.