As an important ecological security barrier in northern China, the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region (hereinafter referred to as Inner Mongolia) is seriously affected by drought. It is of great significance to characterize the spatial distribution of drought and identify the influencing factors of drought. Due to complex interactions among drought driving factors, it is difficult to quantify the contribution of each driving factor to drought using linear correlation analysis alone. In this study, we used the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) as a quantitative indicator of drought to discuss the spatiotemporal variation of drought during growing seasons in the Inner Mongolia from 2000 to 2018. We quantitatively characterized mode, scope, and intensity of changes in SPEI caused by drought-influencing factors such as weather, water, topography, soil, and human activities using the Geodetector and Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR) models. We concluded that about 20.3% of the region showed a downward trend in SPEI, with the fastest rate of decline in the central and western Inner Mongolia. Air temperature, precipitation, elevation, and distance to rivers are the main controlling factors in drought change, and the factor interactions showed nonlinear enhancement. The drought driving effect was obvious in Alxa League, Wuhai City, Ulanqab City, and Baotou City. The results will help us to understand the effects of the driving factors on drought and eventually help policymakers with water-resource management. 1. conclusions Based on the multi-source data at the 110 meteorological stations, DEM, and vegetation types in Inner Mongolia and its surrounding areas, this study investigated the spatiotemporal variation of SPEI during the growing season in Inner Mongolia from 2000 to 2018. Through the introduction of time rate of change in SPEI, we used Geodetector and GWR models to screen the main controlling factors and then effectively quantified the impact of the factors on drought changes and the results are of great significance for
Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 6007 16 of 18
drought-driven research. We made the following conclusions. (1) The SPEI in the growing season from 2000 to 2018 in Inner Mongolia showed a spatial variation pattern from dry west to wet east. The area with light drought accounts for the largest proportion in the whole region. (2) The inter-annual variation of SPEI shows an upward trend and the area of elevated SPEI accounted for 79.70% of the study area. These results indicate that the drought condition became alleviated with time during the growing season in Inner Mongolia. (3) The drought changes in Inner Mongolia were generally controlled by natural factors, with nonlinear interaction between factors enhancing drought impact. The aggravated drought in the central and western regions of the study area, such as Alxa League, Ulanqab City, Baotou City, and Wuhai City, were mainly driven by a synergy of hot air temperature, scarce precipitation, and high elevation, with significant impact from soil and LUCC at an elevation of 800~1300 m. The results from this study should be helpful for decision-making and management of regional water resources. 