Security threats are always there if the human intruders are not identified and recognizedwell in time in highly security-sensitive environments like the military, airports, parliament houses, and banks. Fog computing and machine learning algorithms on Gait sequences can prove to be better for restricting intruders promptly. Gait recognition provides the ability to observe an individual unobtrusively, without any direct cooperation or interaction from the people, making it very attractive than other biometric recognition techniques. In this paper, a Fog Computing andMachine Learning Inspired Human Identity and Gender Recognition using Gait Sequences (FCML-Gait) are proposed. Internet of things (IoT) devices and video capturing sensors are used to acquire data. Frames are clustered using the affinity propagation (AP) clustering technique into several clusters, and cluster-based averaged gait image(C-AGI) feature is determined for each cluster. For training and testing of datasets, sparse reconstruction-based metric learning (SRML) and Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF) with support vector machine (SVM) are applied on benchmark gait database ADSC-AWD having 80 subjects of 20 different individuals in the Fog Layer to improve the processing. The performance metrics, for instance, accuracy, precision, recall, F-measure, C-time, and R-time have been measured, and a comparative evaluation of the projected method with the existing SRML technique has been provided in which the proposed FCML-Gait outperforms and attains the highest accuracy of 95.49%. 1 conclusion and future work The human gait is forthcoming behavioral excellence, and many related learning methods have proved that it has exceptional potential for biometric identification and recognition using IoT and fog computing. This research study demonstrated a simple yet efficient fog-based technique (FCML-Gait) for personal identification and gender recognition from gait sequences. We have used SURF, SRML, and SVM at the fog layer to achieve better recognition accuracy in the real-time instance. We have extracted the feature vectors using the SURF feature descriptor, and for verification of the system, an SRML and SVM-based classifier has been used at the fog layer. The accuracy of the proposed FCMLGait-based recognition system outperforms the previous SRML and other techniques as well. The average accuracy values of different samples (for the training set having n 75%, n 50%, and n 25%) are obtained as 95.49%, 93.07%, and 92.82%, respectively, which are higher than previous (SRML) also an alert is generated for an unauthorized human. Further, in terms of recognition time which is another crucial performance metric in recognition systems, the proposed FCML-based recognition system can achieve
Table 9 Comparative analysis of proposed work with related studies
Authors Dataset Algorithm/techniques IoT FC CC Accuracy/RR (%)
Sruti Das Choudhury et al. [14]
OU-ISIR-B is used An averaged gait key-phase image (AGKI)
No No No 86.46
Jiwen Lu et al. [9] ADSC-AWD SRML No No No 92.7
Xiaohui Zhao et al. [11]
CASIA-B ACM technique No No No 92
Cheng Fengjiang et al. [17] CASIA-B Deterministic machine learning technique
No No No 91.3
M. H. Khan et al. [19] CASIA-B Spatiotemporal characteristics of human motion and Linear SVM
No No No 94.5
Daigo Muramatsu et al. [13]
A subset of OU-ISIR referred to as OULP is used VTM-based approach, TCMs, and Fusion using linear logistic regression (LLR)
No No No 91
Xin Chen et al. [15] multi-gait dataset of 120 persons Support Vector Machine No No No 91.53
M. N. Hidalgo et al. [20]
Their generated dataset K-NN No No Yes 95
Hu Ng et al. [39] SOTON covariate Support Vector Machine No No No 83.21
S. Batool et al. [21] 1 cycle of 30 samples using Accelerometer
Random Forest Classifier Yes No Yes 94
Proposed framework (FCML-Gait)
ADSC-AWD and IoT devices for real-time dataset
Fog Computing and Machine Learning (SURF, SRML, and SVM)
Yes Yes Yes 95.49
an average recognition time of 0.0834 s, which is very less than other existing methods available in the literature. In the cloud, records are kept for future use like decision making, prediction of gender ratio, and alert generation. Despite the benefits of the proposed system, it has some limitations as the dataset used is collected indoor, collection and use of outdoor data via IoT devices is needed. It is not implemented in real-world scenarios as having diversity in the datasets and security threats as well which are not taken into consideration. Qualitative features are not considered and have scope to improve the performance further via the concept of fused feature vectors with other advanced classifiers.