Nonverbal cues are paramount in real-world interactions. Among these cues, gaze has received much attention in the literature. In particular, previous work has shown a search asymmetry between directed and averted gaze towards the observer using photographic stimuli, with faster detection and longer fixation towards directed gaze by the observer. This is known as the stare-in-the-crowd effect. In this study, we investigate whether stare-in-the crowd effect is preserved in Virtual Reality (VR). To this end, we designed a within-subject experiment where 30 human users were immersed in a virtual environment in front of an audience of 11 virtual agents following 4 different gaze behaviours. We analysed the user’s gaze behaviour when observing the audience, computing fixations and dwell time. We also collected the users’ social anxiety score using a post-experiment questionnaire to control for some potential influencing factors. Results show that the stare-in-the-crowd effect is preserved in VR, as demonstrated by the significant differences between gaze behaviours, similarly to what was found in previous studies using photographic stimuli. Additionally, we found a negative correlation between dwell time towards directed gazes and users’ social anxiety scores. Such results are encouraging for the development of expressive and reactive virtual humans, which can be animated to express natural interactive behaviour. 1 conclusions and future work This work addressed the well-known stare-in-the-crowd effect, which predicates the existence of a search asymmetry between directed and averted gaze towards the observer, with faster detection and longer fixation towards directed gaze. In other words, it represents the tendency of humans in noticing and observing, more frequently and for longer time, gazes oriented toward them (directed gaze) than gazes directed elsewhere (averted gaze). The existence of the stare-in-the-crowd effect has been already proven using photographic stimuli, but never in VR. Our results confirmed the stare-in-the-crowd effect in VR alongside the evidence that this effect is milder with people reporting higher social anxiety levels. With this, we showed that gaze can indeed change the focus of attention of a user, and potentially trigger the interaction with an agent. Such results are very encouraging, since they can improve our understanding of social interactions in VR applications and help design more engaging experiences with agents. For example, our gaze conditions could be used to initiate the interaction with the user in a virtual crowd. We also demonstrated a simple dynamic gaze condition that signals complex social behaviour, e.g., directed-then-averted gaze could potentially be interpreted as a sign of embarrassment of the agent. 