Glioma is the most common type of primary malignant brain tumor. Accurate survival time prediction for glioma patients may positively impact treatment planning. In this paper, we develop an automatic survival time prediction tool for glioblastoma patients along with an effective solution to the limited availability of annotated medical imaging datasets. Ensembles of snapshots of three dimensional (3D) deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) are applied to Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) data to predict survival time of high-grade glioma patients. Additionally, multi-sequence MRI images were used to enhance survival prediction performance. A novel way to leverage the potential of ensembles to overcome the limitation of labeled medical image availability is shown. This new classification method separates glioblastoma patients into longand short-term survivors. The BraTS (Brain Tumor Image Segmentation) 2019 training dataset was used in this work. Each patient case consisted of three MRI sequences (T1CE, T2, and FLAIR). Our training set contained 163 cases while the test set included 46 cases. The best known prediction accuracy of 74% for this type of problem was achieved on the unseen test set. 6. conclusions and future work In summary, we demonstrated an overall survival prediction for glioblastoma patients at 74% accuracy using a multi-branch 3D convolutional neural network, where each branch was a different MR image sequence. The system classified patients into two classes (longand short-term survival). In a comparison on the same data with the best known predictor, our approach was 6% more accurate. An important contribution of this work is the effective use of snapshot ensembles in a novel fashion towards a solution to the limited availability of labeled images in many medical imaging datasets. Snapshots are a fast, low cost way to generate an ensemble of classifiers. Based on recent studies [26–34], improved communication and information exchange between radiology and histopathology is needed more than ever. Many papers have shown benefits in integrating several markers for more accurate OS prediction of patients with glioma. A study [29] used deep artificial neural networks on histopathologic images of gliomas and found an association of OS with several histopathologic features, such as pseudopalisading and geographic necrosis and inflammation. Recent work [26,32,33] has
shown the integrated potential of MR and histopathologic images, which has provided diagnostically relevant information for the prediction of OS in glioma. Similarly, it has been demonstrated that combining radiomics with multiomics can offer additional prognostic value [34]. Another study confirmed higher prediction accuracy when a combination of histopathologic images and genomic markers (isocitrate dehydrogenase [IDH], 1p/19q) was used [27]. Moreover, it has been shown that the addition of a radiomics model to clinical and genetic profiles improved survival prediction on glioblastoma when compared with models containing clinical and genetic profiles alone [28]. This study has the limitation of using a pre-operative dataset to perform OS prediction. This can result in leaving out several prognostic factors that are available after histological confirmation. In research, the most common prognostic factors for survival in glioblastoma patients were found to be: The age of patients, extent of resection, recursive partitioning analysis (RPA) class [35], performance status (using Karnofsky Performance Scale (KPS) or the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)/World Health Organization (WHO) performance status) [36], and postoperative chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy [37]. In addition to IDH mutations [38] and 1p/19q codeletion [39], the methylation status of the O6-methyl guanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) gene promoter has been shown to be a strong predictor of the survival of glioblastoma patients [40]. There exists other prognostic molecular markers for which diagnostic evaluation is not routinely performed such as G-CIMP methylation, TERT promoter mutations, EGFR alterations, BRAF V600E mutations, Histone mutations, and H3K27 mutation, which can occur in histone H3.1 or H3.3 [41]. On the other hand, it may be possible to identify additional prognostic information using image analysis of the post-operative or post-treatment MRIs. A recent study has demonstrated an association between post-operative residual contrast-enhancing tumor volume in the post-surgical MRI and overall survival in newly diagnosed glioblastoma [42]. Furthermore, in our recent work [43], we showed that deep features extracted from posttreatment MRI scans, which were obtained during or after therapy, can entail relevant information for overall survival prediction. Recently, there has been increased interest in integrating non-invasive imaging techniques with clinical care in brain tumor patients. For instance, the use of amino acid PET has been shown to better identify the most biologically aggressive components of heterogeneous low and high-grade glioma [44,45].