Recent studies have shown that recommendation systems commonly suffer from popularity bias. Popularity bias refers to the problem that popular items (i.e., frequently rated items) are recommended frequently while less popular items are recommended rarely or not at all. Researchers adopted two approaches to examining popularity bias: (i) from the users’ perspective, by analyzing how far a recommendation system deviates from user’s expectations in receiving popular items, and (ii) by analyzing the amount of exposure that long-tail items receive, measured by overall catalog coverage and novelty. In this paper, we examine the first point of view in the book domain, although the findings may be applied to other domains as well. To this end, we analyze the well-known Book-Crossing dataset and define three user groups based on their tendency towards popular items (i.e., Niche, Diverse, Bestsellerfocused). Further, we evaluate the performance of nine state-of-the-art recommendation algorithms and two baselines (i.e., Random, MostPop) from both the accuracy (e.g., NDCG, Precision, Recall) and popularity bias perspectives. Our results indicate that most state-of-the-art recommendation algorithms suffer from popularity bias in the book domain, and fail to meet users’ expectations with Niche and Diverse tastes despite having a larger profile size. Conversely, Bestseller-focused users are more likely to receive high-quality recommendations, both in terms of fairness and personalization. Furthermore, our study shows a tradeoff between personalization and unfairness of popularity bias in recommendation algorithms for users belonging to the Diverse and Bestseller groups, that is, algorithms with high capability of personalization suffer from the unfairness of popularity bias. Finally, across the models, our results show that WMF and VAECF can provide a higher quality recommendation when considering both accuracy and fairness perspectives. 1 conclusion and future work In this paper, we reproduced the study of Abdollahpouri et al. [2] on the unfairness of popularity bias from the user’s perspective in the Movie domain, which we have applied to the book domain. Similar to the original paper, we divided all users into three groups (i.e., Niche, Diverse and Bestseller-focused) based on their level of interest in popular items. Our results on various state-of-theart recommendation algorithms reveal that the most widely adopted algorithms fail to capture users’ interest in unpopular items and recommend mostly popular items. Notably, the quality of recommendations received by users with a
Diverse or Niche taste is significantly lower than that of users with Bestsellers taste, despite having a large profile size. Moreover, our experiments led to new observations and possible directions for future research. First, we noticed that algorithms could differ significantly in their ability to capture users’ tastes based on the domain. For instance, the NMF algorithm suffers from the unfairness of popularity bias in the music domain [14] while offering an entirely fair recommendation in Book-Crossing dataset. A future research direction that would be interesting is identifying the underlying reason for the variance, in particular, which feature of the data (e.g., sparsity, average user interaction) plays the primary role in propagating the popularity bias. Additionally, our results suggest that an underlying tradeoff exists between personalization and fairness of popularity bias in Diverse and Bestseller-focused groups, that is, algorithms with high personalization abilities tend to experience fairness issues.