We offer theory and evidence regarding the impact of content ideology (i.e., emotionally charged beliefs expressed in sentiments) on opinion polarization (i.e., conflicting attitudes about an event) on social media. Specifically, we consider the moderating role of functional affordances and symbolic expressions to draw inferences about opinion polarization. From a sentiment analysis of 3,600 posts and a survey of 468 Weibo users, we find that content ideology is positively related to social media opinion polarization. The effect of content ideology is greater when users receive stronger symbolic expressions. Further, our results show an insignificant moderating relationship between functional affordances and this effect. The findings suggest that it is critical to consider content ideology and symbolic expressions when assessing the relationship between published content and polarized opinions on social media. 1. conclusion The question of how content on social media induces opinion polarization is crucial to society in the digital era. Our study provides a much-needed investigation of social media opinion polarization, supported by insights obtained from users’ reactions to different posts with different content ideology, and interacting with the intervention of functional affordances and symbolic expressions. As inspired by the emerging sentiment perspective of such polarization, we found a strong causal effect of a post’s content ideology, which complements the literature on social media polarization that explores other antecedents than echo chambers. Our findings also lead to new research opportunities. Our study provides instrumental insights for online regulatory bodies and social media designers to detect and mitigate the digital and social risks of social media opinion polarization. appendix b. an illustration of content ideology extraction In general, we used Jieba to reduce the irrelevant semantics in Weibo content and to improve the number and density of keywords. To illustrate, we captured the core part of the code scheme Post_sentiment = [] for string in df['Post content’]: words = jieba.lcut(str(string)) words_vec = sum_vec(words) model = joblib.load('dt_model.pkl') result = model.predict(words_vec)
We used algorithm (1) to weigh words with different ideological intensity. represents the number of words expressing aggressive and constructive semantics
respectively. represents the weights of aggressive and constructive semantics respectively. In general, a weighted result of (-1) is aggressive, and a negative result of (1) is constructive, and a result of zero (0) is neutral. Further, we used the BosonNLP polarity dictionary to validate the semantic analysis result. BosonNLP contains a dictionary of 114,767 commonly used words assigned as aggressiveness or constructiveness. To illustrate our validating process, we captured the core part of the code scheme def word_cut(x): return jieba.lcut(x) con['words'] = con[0].apply(word_cut) agg['words'] = agg[0].apply(word_cut) x = np.concatenate((con['words'], agg['words'])) y = np.concatenate((np.con ones(len(pos)), np. agg ones(len(neg)))) np.save('X_train.npy', x) np.save('y_train.npy', y) appendix c. an illustration of functional affordances and symbolic expressions Symbolic expressions
Functional affordances appendix d. questionnaire items Construct Items Sources Opinion polarisation (OP) (OP) I support what the post describes. Lee et al. (2014) Content ideology (CI) (CI1) The post uses aggressive terms to describe the event. (CI2) In general, I would describe the post as aggressive. Chen et al. (2012)
(FA1) The post enables me to reach relevant accounts and people through @. (FA2) The post enables me to reach relevant tagging categorisation through #. (FA3) The post enables me to gain more comprehensive information through URL. Vaast et al. (2017)
(SE1) The post communicates me with its impact through the number of reposts. (SE2) The post communicates me with its impact through the number of comments. (SE3) The post communicates me with its impact through the number of likes. Lee et al. (2018), Oh et al. (2017)
