Mobile learning is the newest and emerging technology embraced by universities and this seems to be fast establishing itself as the preferred mode of learning in many countries. However, ways in which mobile devices are used to meet learning goals seem under-researched and may require more effort from researchers, especially in the context of Africa. This empirical study sought to investigate the state of mobile usage among higher education students, their experiences, and available facilitating conditions that influence mobile learning in a Ghanaian university setting. A total of 222 students (distance and vacation students) were engaged to respond to the questionnaires employed for the study. Findings revealed that mobile learning exists in a somewhat structured form as the environment showed most of the salient characteristics of mobile learning but largely remained unharnessed. To a large extent, facilitating conditions for mobile learning were available; students showed positive experiences with their mobile devices and their use in accessing learning, but largely such learning did not occur via the deployed learner management system of the institution. Implications for policy formulation for the Institution and other similar ones that are striving to incorporate mobile technology to increase access and improve the quality of instruction delivery are discussed. 1 conclusions, implications, research limitations, and future work The study had some limitations. The use of accidental sampling and the collection of data from a specific university with its unique context precludes a broader generalization of its findings. Consequently, the sampling strategy employed, in addition to the relatively small sample size compared to the total student population, does not lead to using standard tests of statistical inferences that can be used to draw conclusions about the target population. The limitations of the study notwithstanding, the findings infer implications for practice in the setting of the study. Insights into mobile devices that can be employed for instructional delivery in other institutions with similar contexts that are seeking to implement or scale up mobile learning can also be inferred. The results showed high access levels of personal mobile devices are owned by students. However, some students faced some difficulties in acquiring their devices; an indication that access problems may continue to exist in the future. We advocate
1 3
3395
Education and Information Technologies (2023) 28:3381–3399
that in the interim, while UEW takes advantage of the access levels and operates the policy on Bring-Your-Ywn Device (BYOD) (cf. Arthur-Nyarko et al., 2020), the University’s policy of supplying tablets to students at affordable prices may have to continue to allow students who cannot purchase mobile devices do so at flexible conditions. The study also showed that students have positive experiences with mobile devices and use them in accessing learning somehow through surfing the internet for general information, but largely not via the University’s Learning Management System (MOODLE). Enrolling students on the platform should be a whole university-wide or systemic programme and should not be left in the hands of individual students to decide whether or not they will migrate to the platform. Training of the Institution’s instructors to equip them with ICT skills to be able to mount courses, run and manage them on the LMS also become imperative. According to Bansah & Agyei (2022) and Agyei (2021), when instructors are provided with such training support, they can handle the realities of teaching with ICT; newly appointed instructors are also supported from abandoning innovative teaching approaches with ICT in favour of what they may perceive as safer and less complex activities. The study has also shown that mobile learning exists in a somewhat structured form but is not fully harnessed in the University; it seems an unintended consequence of the attempt to provide e-learning (the parent ICT learning mode to mobile learning). As evident, there is a need for a policy to drive the system to make it a fully compliant mobile learning educational environment. When such a policy is clearly articulated within the framework of the Institution, it will help in providing a firm foundation in teaching and learning with mobile devices to improve learning outcomes (Bansah & Agyei, 2022).