In critical infrastructure applications, timely and consistent fault detection and diagnosis is an increasingly important operational process, especially in the energy sector where safety is of the utmost importance. To realise this, engineers have to manually analyse data acquired from several assets using predefined diagnostic processes, but this is a time-consuming process requiring significant amounts of specialist expert knowledge. Data-driven approaches to support fault detection and diagnosis, and other similar problems, can produce accurate results comparable to what the engineers can achieve in a fraction of the time. However, the majority of these data-driven techniques are black box techniques and lack explainability which is often necessary for explaining decisions about critical assets in the power generation industry. Knowledge-based systems, such as rule-based expert systems have been shown to provide not only accurate decisions but also the explanation and reasoning behind these decisions in some related applications. However, there is a significant time cost associated with the development of knowledge-based systems, and in particular with the knowledge elicitation process, where the domain expert’s knowledge is formalised and is encoded into the system. This challenge is commonly referred to as the knowledge elicitation bottleneck. In this paper, we present a novel approach to performing the knowledge elicitation using a set of symbolic primitives (rise, fall, fluctuate, and stable) to parameterise typical time-series condition monitoring data. The knowledge is represented by using a common language that can easily be communicated with (and from) the domain experts. This allows for the quick and accurate elicitation of the domain experts knowledge, but also the formalisation and implementation of the knowledge into a rapidly produced diagnostic system. Further to this, due to the parametrisation of the knowledge, it is possible to iteratively improve the knowledge base by updating these parameters based on new unseen data. This approach was applied to the Tennessee Eastman dataset, which is simulated data of a real-world industrial process. It was found that by using this approach it was possible to accurately and quickly capture the knowledge required to detect several faults within the case study dataset, but also provided fully explained reasons why each fault was detected by relating the explanations to the symbolic primitives previously defined. 1. conclusions; in general, machine learning or data-driven approaches are unable to solve this type of problem. This is mainly due to the large amount of training data required to learn the faults or the lack of explainability due to the black-box nature of these techniques. In addition to this, for these types of industrial problems, there is a significant amount of domain expert knowledge available due to the current engineers having to perform this fault diagnosis process manually. The process of incorporating the domain expert knowledge into data-driven models is currently an active area of research but is far from a trivial
problem  In conclusion, comparing the proposed technique with the standard structured interview, showed in this example a twofold saving in time. 7. conclusion and future work This paper has introduced a new approach to tackle the knowledge elicitation process for a sub-set of problems, namely the codification and capture of knowledge involved in the interpretation of time series data. This type of problem is seen across many engineering domains and is particularly prevalent in the development of expert systems for supporting the health assessment of industrial assets. While knowledgedriven approaches, such as expert systems were prominent in the 1980’s and 1990’s advances in neural networks, and in particular the advent of deep neural networks have resulted in significant advances in many AI applications. However, for many engineering applications such as health monitoring and assessment of industrial assets, there
is still the need for the explainability that is currently unavailable
from purely data drive black-box approaches. As a result, the capture and codification of specialist knowledge relating to the interpretation of condition monitoring data is of importance, and the issue of the knowledge elicitation bottleneck still exists. This proposed approach has been shown to offer benefits in terms of time-saving. Historically, the main drawback to the development of these types of systems was the time involved in the capturing of domain expert knowledge from already time-poor engineers. The reduction in time, specifically in the knowledge elicitation phase, from a business perspective and the development of these types of systems places much less of a time burden on the already busy engineers. This new approach to performing knowledge elicitation for knowledge-based systems allows for the parameterisation of domain expert knowledge and the rapid prototyping of an expert system. This is important as there is an inherent brittleness in traditional expert systems due to the formalisation of the knowledge, and the ease in which the knowledge can be updated. It was demonstrated using a case study that it was possible to produce a knowledge-based system that can detect specific faults quickly and accurately. Also using this
approach to formulate the knowledge in a symbolic manner results in the explanation of the results in an accessible way that does not require any specialist training. Due to the nature of how an expert system is designed using this approach, updating specific parameters allows for the iterative improvement of the knowledge base and hence the system without the need to redesign the entire system. This paper represents a step towards reducing the knowledge elicitation bottleneck, but there are limitations to the proposed approach. It currently focuses only on the interpretation of time series data and anticipates the captured knowledge will reason about trends in data. Furthermore, temporal relationships between multiple data streams are relatively common in condition monitoring data but have not been fully addressed here. For example, seeing an increase in one parameter, flow rate, for example, may result in a corresponding, but delayed increase in value in another parameter, say temperature. Secondly, the elicitation process is still predominantly a human to human process, which is then transferred to the expert system. This data imbalance, where there are often large volumes of normal operating data, and very few instances of failure data is another common challenge, and capture and codification of this diagnostic knowledge in a manner that they can be shared across multiple instances of expert systems remains an open problem.
See Tables 7 and 8.