Reactive species refers to a group of chemicals, mainly reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), that are naturally formed by cells as a byproduct of cell metabolism and regulated by various internal and external factors. Due to their highly chemical reactivity, ROS play a crucial role in physiological and pathological processes which is why studies on ROS regulation for disease treatment show attracted increasing interest. Notably, ROS are now studied as a powerful therapeutic weapon in ROS-regulating therapies such as ROS-based cytotoxic therapies mediated by ROS-increasing agents for cancer treatment. Thanks to the significant progress in nanotechnology, innovative nanoplatforms with ROS-regulating activities have been developed to look for effective ROS-related nanomedicines. In this review, studies on ROS-based cytotoxic therapies against cancer as photodynamic therapy (PDT), sonodynamic therapy (SDT), radiation therapy (RT) and chemodynamic therapy (CDT) are discussed, with a focus on the stimuli-responsive ROS-generating nanoplatforms developed for breaking the current therapeutic limits of ROS-based cytotoxic therapies. Finally, we suppose that our review on this developing field will be valuable for promoting the progress of ROS-based cytotoxic therapies not only in basic research but overall, in translational research and clinical application. 1 conclusions Research into ROS-based therapies in cancer treatments has been a hot topic over the past few years, thanks to the intensive studies of ROS in cancer prevention and the rapid development of nanotechnologies. Researchers fully use the unique properties of ROS in cancer therapy to contribute to various tumor treatment modalities. Furthermore, considering the previous matters and limitations described, important is to propose few aspects on which focusing further studies for accelerating the translation to the clinical setting of ROS-generating nanoplatforms. In conclusion, more feasible diagnostic modalities for monitoring the ROS levels in selected target sites into human body as the simplification of nanostructure construction represent pivotal technological and scientific issues for the
Vol. :(0123456789)
successful development of ROS-generating nanoplatforms. This is extremely important for determining the optimal doses of ROS-generating nanomedicines and improving the translational feasibility. In the coming decades, ROS-based cytotoxic therapies have the potential to become front-runner in the fight against cancer.