Nuclear receptors (NRs) form a family of druggable transcription factors that are regulated by ligand binding to orchestrate multifaceted physiological functions, including reproduction, immunity, metabolism, and growth. NRs represent attractive and valid targets for the management and treatment of a vast array of ailments. Pentacyclic triterpenes (PTs) are ubiquitously distributed natural products in medicinal and aromatic plants, of which ursolic acid (UA) is an extensively studied member, due to its diverse bio-pertinent activities against different cancers, inflammation, aging, obesity, diabetes, dyslipidemia, and liver injury. In fact, PTs share a common lipophilic structure that resembles NRs’ endogenous ligands. Herein, we present a review of the literature on UA’s effect on NRs, showcasing the resulting health benefits and potential therapeutic outcomes. De facto, UA exhibited numerous pharmacodynamic effects on PPAR, LXR, FXR, and PXR, resulting in remarkable anti-inflammatory, anti-hyperlipidemic, and hepatoprotective properties, by lowering lipid accumulation in hepatocytes and mitigating non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and its subsequent liver fibrosis. Furthermore, UA reversed valproate and rifampicin-induced hepatic lipid accumulation. Additionally, UA showed great promise for the treatment of autoimmune inflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis and autoimmune arthritis by antagonizing RORγ. UA exhibited antiproliferative effects against skin, prostate, and breast cancers, partially via PPARα and RORγ pathways. Herein, for the first time, we explore and provide insights into UA bioactivity with respect to NR modulation. 1. conclusions Selective NR modulation, in the way that introduces health benefits with minimal side effects, is a real challenge due to its conservative structure and unpredictable tissuespecific response. However, finding such a selective modulator can be of huge health benefit in terms of fighting metabolic syndromes that lead to the development of heart and cardiovascular disease. PTs possess a lipophilic structure, making them efficient NR modulators. Indeed, UA demonstrated various pharmacodynamic effects on PPAR, LXR, PXR/CAR, ROR, and FXR. As a result, it exhibited a multitude of health benefits, especially in terms of metabolic disorders, including insulin resistance, diabetes type II, NASH, hyperlipidemia alongside neuroprotection and an anti-asthma effect. Owing to PPARα upregulation, UA can be employed in pharmaceutical and cosmeceutical dermatology and skin cancer. Furthermore, UA showed a comparable anti-hyperlipidemic effect to atorvastatin in vivo. In addition, a significant role of UA in the treatment of autoimmune inflammatory diseases was observed and attributed to RORγt agonism. The latter effect has further conferred anti-proliferative potential to UA in cases of TNBC and PCa.