Phenolic compounds have recently gained interest, as they have been related to improvements in health and disease prevention, such as inflammatory intestinal pathologies and obesity. However, their bioactivity may be limited by their instability or low concentration in food matrices and along the gastrointestinal tract once consumed. This has led to the study of technological processing with the aim of optimizing phenolic compounds’ biological properties. In this sense, different extraction systems have been applied to vegetable sources for the purpose of obtaining enriched phenolic extracts such as PLE, MAE, SFE, and UAE. In addition, many in vitro and in vivo studies evaluating the potential mechanisms of these compounds have also been published. This review includes a case study of the Hibiscus genera as an interesting source of phenolic compounds. The main goal of this work is to describe: (a) phenolic compound extraction by designs of experiments (DoEs) applied to conventional and advanced systems; (b) the influence of the extraction system on the phenolic composition and, consequently, on the bioactive properties of these extracts; and (c) bioaccessibility and bioactivity evaluation of Hibiscus phenolic extracts. The results have pointed out that the most used DoEs were based on response surface methodologies (RSM), mainly the Box–Behnken design (BBD) and central composite design (CCD). The chemical composition of the optimized enriched extracts showed an abundance of flavonoids, as well as anthocyanins and phenolic acids. In vitro and in vivo studies have highlighted their potent bioactivity, with particular emphasis on obesity and related disorders. This scientific evidence establishes the Hibiscus genera as an interesting source of phytochemicals with demonstrated bioactive potential for the development of functional foods.   Male Wistar rats were used as animal models for evaluating antioxidant effects of different dosages of phenolic compounds from Hibiscus sabdariffa [55]. The anthocyanin content of hibiscus extracts were also shown to protect against deleterious effects of lead intoxication in the livers and kidneys of Wistar rats [53]. Lastly, polyphenolic compounds from Hibiscus sabdariffa extract produced an inhibition effect on colon carcinoma metastasis in Balb/c-nude rats [52]. 3.3. bioaccessibility and microbiota interaction of phenolic compounds from hibiscus The bioactivity of phenolic compounds, and, more specifically, Hibiscus phenolic extracts, as well as their impact on multiple pathologies, was summarized in the previous section. However, these implications are highly dependent on the ability of phenolic extracts to reach specific areas of action. Once polyphenols are released from the food matrix, their instability under gastrointestinal conditions (pH or enzymatic activity) greatly reduces their bioaccessibility and bioavailability, thus impairing the achievement of their desired activities. In this way, a wide range of factors affects phenolic stability, such as chemical structure, interaction with other compounds present in the food matrix, presence of precursors, biological conditions, the nature of the absorption process, or, more importantly, even the interaction with the existing microbiota. As far as Hibiscus phenolic compounds are concerned, a small number of studies have conducted research to obtain a better understanding of their complex and high bioaccessibility under simulated gastrointestinal digestion. The standardized digestion protocol Infogest was applied to establish the upper gastrointestinal digestion of Hibiscus phenolic extracts [56]. High bioaccessibility of phenolic acids, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and related metabolites was reported. These compounds are abundant in pre-digested hibiscus extracts and, more importantly, have been identified as responsible for most their biological activities. Dynamic models have also been used for evaluating the gastrointestinal digestion of these phytochemicals, allowing simulation of the full gastrointestinal tract from stomach to colon [39,40]. In these studies, colonic microbiota mediated phenolic bioconversion of Hibiscus extracts. As has previously been described, phenolic extract administration resulted in a modulation of the microbial profile. These investigations suggested that these phenolic compounds showed antimicrobial activity, microbiota modulation, and, more specifically, obesity-related microbiota effects (phenolic acids, anthocyanins). Indeed, the dynamic in vitro human gastrointestinal simulations reported that phenolic acids, flavonoids, and anthocyanins were able to have a modulating effect on colonic microbiota composition. Prior to in vitro fermentation, 45 bacterial genera were identified, with postfermentation results presenting significant variations in 10 of them. Mainly, a high recount of Bifidobacteirum, Bacteroides, Catenibacterium, and Lactobacillus were observed. In this sense, the increase in Bacteroides was inhibited after 24 h digestion due to the antimicrobial activity of Hibiscus sabdariffa. Thus, phenolic compounds from its extract were able to promote the genera Bifidobacteirum and Lactobacillus while significantly reducing the presence of Bacteroides. The anthocyanin and phenolic acid contents in hibiscus extracts were able to modulate microbiota, with a significant impact on obesity. Thus, as can be observed, although the bioaccessibility of hibiscus extracts has not been widely researched, these extracts have proven to be high in significant bioactive phenolic compounds, reported phenolic acids, flavonoids, and anthocyanins. These bioaccessible hibiscus compounds have also been proven to have a modulating effect on colonic microbiota, which poses them as potential sources of compounds for improving gut health. 4. conclusions Hibiscus sabdariffa has proven to be a promising plant source of an abundance of phenolic compounds, from flavonoids such as myricetin, quercetin, and derivatives; phenolic acids, especially caffeic, chlorogenic, coumaroylquinic, gallic, and ellagic acids; and anthocyanins, such as delphinidin, cyanidin, and derivatives. The best extraction methodology
Foods 2023, 12, 963 13 of 15
for maximum total polyphenol recovery was UAE, whereas PLE was the most adequate technique for recovering flavonoids, anthocyanins, and phenolic acids. In fact, PLE reported a high extraction yield for all studied compounds; thus, it should be proposed for a combined extraction from Hibiscus polyphenols. On the contrary, CO2-SFE seemed to be the least efficient for obtaining enriched phenolic extracts from Hibiscus. Moreover, the extraction of these compounds appears to be essential for their bioactivity, as their effects on recorded pathologies such as obesity are related to their content in the mentioned compounds.