The main aim of this review is to assess the potential use of natural cross-linking agents, such as genipin, citric acid, tannic acid, epigallocatechin gallate, and vanillin in preparing chemically cross-linked hydrogels for the biomedical, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries. Chemical cross-linking is one of the most important methods that is commonly used to form mechanically strong hydrogels based on biopolymers, such as alginates, chitosan, hyaluronic acid, collagen, gelatin, and fibroin. Moreover, the properties of natural cross-linking agents and their advantages and disadvantages are compared relative to their commonly known synthetic cross-linking counterparts. Nowadays, advanced technologies can facilitate the acquisition of high-purity biomaterials from unreacted components with no additional purification steps. However, while planning and designing a chemical process, energy and water consumption should be limited in order to reduce the risks associated with global warming. However, many synthetic cross-linking agents, such as N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide, ethylene glycol dimethacrylate, poly (ethylene glycol) diacrylates, epichlorohydrin, and glutaraldehyde, are harmful to both humans and the environment. One solution to this problem could be the use of bio-cross-linking agents obtained from natural resources, which would eliminate their toxic effects and ensure the safety for humans and the environment. 1. conclusions Several synthetic cross-linking agents (N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide, ethylene glycol dimethacrylate, poly (ethylene glycol) diacrylates, epichlorohydrin, and glutaraldehyde) are commonly used to prepare hydrogels. However, this group of compounds is characterised as being harmful and toxic to both humans and the environment. The use of synthetic cross-linkers often requires additional purification steps in the technological process, which requires the input of energy, water, and solvents and, as a result, contributes to global warming. Therefore, it is worth considering the use of natural cross-linking agents such as genipin, citric acid, tannic acid, epigallocatechin gallate as well as vanillin, which produce safer hydrogels for biomedical, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic use. In this review, we focused on the chemical cross-linking of biopolymers, such as alginates, chitosan, hyaluronic acid, collagen, gelatin, and fibroin, and the use of different cross-linkers. Recent developments in the field of hydrogel production have led to the more frequent use of natural cross-linkers. This review compared and succinctly discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the synthetic and natural cross-linking agents. Author Contributions: P.S. Conceptualisation, visualisation, writing—original draft, writing—editing; K.B.-W.: Conceptualisation, visualisation, writing—original draft; K.M. : Visualisation, writing— original draft. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: Not applicable. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.