Poly(ethylene oxide)-poly(ε-caprolactone) (PEO-PCL) is a family of block (or graft) copolymers with several biomedical applications. These types of copolymers are well-known for their good biocompatibility and biodegradability properties, being ideal for biomedical applications and for the formation of a variety of nanosystems intended for controlled drug release. The aim of this review is to present the applications and the properties of different nanocarriers derived from PEO-PCL block and graft copolymers. Micelles, polymeric nanoparticles, drug conjugates, nanocapsules, and hybrid polymer-lipid nanoparticles, such as hybrid liposomes, are the main categories of PEO-PCL based nanocarriers loaded with different active ingredients. The advantages and the limitations in preclinical studies are also discussed in depth. PEO-PCL based nanocarriers could be the next generation of delivery systems with fast clinical translation. Finally, current challenges and future perspectives of the PEO-PCL based nanocarriers are highlighted. 1. conclusions PEO-PCL block or graft copolymers, belonging to the family of biocompatible and biodegradable copolymer and exhibiting stealth properties, due to the presence of PEO blocks, show great potential in biomedical applications and most interestingly as drug delivery nanocarriers (Schemes 1 and 2). As depicted by the studies described above, the employment of PEO-PCL in nanocarriers, such as micelles and polymeric or hybrid lipid-polymeric nanoparticles, provides safer and more efficient drug treatments, by improving drug biodistribution and tissue penetration, also increasing the bioavailability and decreasing the toxicity and side effects. As already indicated, PEO-PCL and consequently PEO-PCL-based nanoparticles offer flexibility in terms of design from a technological standpoint. Initially, these polymers come in a variety of kinds (compositions and architectures). These nanosystem physicochemical properties are essential to how they behave both in vitro and in vivo. All the techniques for their characterization are summarized in Table 1. It is also possible to create controlled release qualities and targeting by using various functionalization techniques. Moreover, PEO-PCL can be easily functionalized, allowing targeting ability. On the other hand, there are just a few products/medicines where PEO-PCL copolymers are utilized. All the nanomedicines and PEO-PCL formulations in development must undergo a thorough examination in terms of the physicochemical and morphological characteristics utilizing specialist procedures. Preclinical research is more expensive because of this need compared to other pharmaceutical formulations, i.e., tablets, suspensions, etc. At every stage of the design and development of the aforementioned
Materials 2023, 16, 2298 18 of 22
platforms, as well as for knowledge transfer between academic institutions and the pharmaceutical companies, big pharma also needs scientists (chemists and formulation scientists) with training and great experience in the field of the synthesis and characterization of PEO-PCL materials and formulations. In conclusion, we have discussed a number of PEO-PCL drug delivery nanosystem examples from the literature that have emerged in recent years at various preclinical and clinical study stages. For the continued development of these systems as nanomedicines, the results and outcomes were in the majority of the stated situations highly positive.