Chagas disease is a neglected tropical disease that affects more than 8 million people. Although there are therapies against this disease, the search for new drugs is important because the current treatments show limited effectiveness and high toxicity. In this work, eighteen dihydrobenzofuran-type neolignans (DBNs) and two benzofuran-type neolignans (BNs) were synthesized and evaluated against amastigote forms of two Trypanosoma cruzi strains. The in vitro cytotoxicity and hemolytic activity of the most active compounds were also evaluated and their relationships with T. cruzi tubulin DBNs were investigated by an in silico approach. Four DBNs demonstrated activity against the T. cruzi Tulahuen lac-Z strain (IC50 from 7.96 to 21.12 μM), and DBN 1 exhibited the highest activity against the amastigote forms of the T. cruzi Y strain (IC50 3.26 μM). Compounds 1–4 showed CC50 values higher than antitrypanosomal activities, except for DBN 3. All DBNs with antitrypanosomal activity demonstrated CH50 higher than 100 μM. The in silico results indicated that DBNs 1, 2, and 4 are capable of destabilizing the dynamics of the tubulinmicrotubule from the vinca site. These compounds displayed promising in vitro activity against T. cruzi, especially compound 1, and can be considered molecular prototypes for the development of new antiparasitic drugs. 1. conclusions The neolignans evaluated in this study demonstrated promising in vitro activity on amastigote forms of T. cruzi, with emphasis on compounds 1, 2, and 4. The results obtained from molecular docking indicated that 1, 2, and 4 are capable of destabilizing the dynamics of the tubulin-microtubule from the vinca site. The results indicated that the presence of the ester carbonyl at C9 and C9′ and the double bond between C7′ and C8′ play a key role in the antitrypanosomal activity. However, these preliminary structure-activity relationships must be further confirmed by QSAR (Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships) studies, which are underway. Compound 1 displayed an IC50 agaisnt the T. cruzi Y strain similar to that of BZN but with a two-fold increased selectivity to T. cruzi as compared to LLC-MK2 cells. These
results demonstrated that DBN 1 can be considered a molecular prototype that could be used for the development of new antitrypanosomal drugs.