The classification of olive oils and the authentication of their biological or geographic origin are important issues for public health and for the olive oil market and related industries. The development of techniques for olive oil classification that are fast, easy to use, and suitable for online, in situ and remote operation is of high interest. In this study, the possibility of discriminating and classifying vegetable oils according to different criteria related to biological or geographical origin was assessed using cyclic voltammograms (CVs) as input data, obtained with electrochemical sensors based on carbonaceous nanomaterials and gold nanoparticles. In this context, 44 vegetable oil samples of different categories were analyzed and the capacity of the sensor array coupled with multivariate analysis was evaluated. The characteristics highlighted in voltammograms are related to the redox properties of the electroactive compounds, mainly phenolics, existing in the oils. Moreover, the antioxidant activity of the oils’ hydrophilic fraction was also estimated by conventional spectrophotometric methods (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and galvinoxyl) and correlated with the voltammetric responses of the sensors. The percentage of DPPH and galvinoxyl inhibition was accurately predicted from the voltammetric data, with a correlation coefficients greater than 0.97 both in calibration and in validation. The results indicate that this method allows for a clear discrimination of oils from different biological or geographic origins. 1. conclusions In this study, models were developed for discriminating and classifying oil samples based on different criteria, using an electrochemical method based on SPE modified with different carbonaceous nanomaterials and GNP. The electrochemical signals were used as input variables in multivariate data analysis studies. At the same time, it was established that there was a very good correlation between the electrochemical responses of the sensors when immersed in solutions from the 44 oil samples studied and the data obtained from the DPPH and galvinoxyl spectrophotometric assays for the assessment of antioxidant activity. As a result of this study, it can be concluded that electrochemical sensors can be useful for the estimation of antioxidant activity of different types of oils, including EVOO, but also that they can be used for the discrimination and classification of vegetable oils. The use of sensors and biosensors in industry and quality control laboratories is still limited, even though these have numerous advantages and adequate sensitivity.