Natural polysaccharides with high viscosity, good thermal stability, and biocompatibility can improve the mechanical properties of inorganic silica aerogels and enhance their application safety. However, the effects of the preparation methods of polysaccharide-silica aerogels on their microstructure and application properties have not been systematically studied. To better investigate the effect of the microstructure on the properties of aerogel materials, two aerogels with different structures were prepared using Konjac glucomannan (KGM) and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) via physical blending (KTB) and co-precursor methods (KTC), respectively. The structural differences between the KTB and KTC aerogels were characterized, and the thermal insulation and fire-retardant properties were further investigated. The compressive strength of the KTC aerogels with a crosslinked interpenetrating network (IPN) structure was three times higher than that of the KTB aerogels, while their thermal conductivity was 1/3 of that of the KTB aerogels. The maximum limiting oxygen index (LOI) of the KTC aerogels was 1.4 times, the low peak heat release rate (PHRR) was reduced by 61.45%, and the lowest total heat release (THR) was reduced by 41.35% compared with the KTB aerogels. The results showed that the KTC aerogels with the IPN have better mechanical properties, thermal insulation, and fire-retardant properties than the simple physically blending KTB aerogels. This may be due to the stronger hydrogen-bonding interactions between KGM and silica molecules in the KTC aerogels under the unique forcing effect of the IPN, thus enhancing their structural stability and achieving complementary properties. This work will provide new ideas for the microstructure design of aerogels and the research of new thermal insulation and fire-retardant aerogels. 1. conclusions In this work, two kinds of inorganic–biomass composite aerogels were prepared, and their structural analysis, thermal insulation, and fire-retardant properties were carried out. The KTC aerogels prepared by the co-precursor of KGM and TEOS not only have strong mechanical properties but also have a thermal conductivity of 0.028–0.036 W/m·K, which is reduced to 1/3 of the thermal conductivity of 0.065–0.095 W/m·K compared with that of the aerogels prepared via the physical blending of KGM and SA particles. The peak decomposition temperature of the KTC aerogels was 30 ◦C higher than that of the KTB due to the IPN of internal cross-linking that prevents heat transfer. Data from HRR and THR show that the cross-linked network formed by KGM and TEOS has a better enhancement of its flame-retardant performance. Optimizing the microstructure of aerogels in the preparation method, can first significantly improve the thermal insulation performance and have a good flame-retardant effect. This work provides new ideas for the preparation of aerogels with thermal insulation and flame-retardant properties.