Aerogels are a class of lightweight, nanoporous, and nanostructured materials with diverse chemical compositions and a huge potential for applications in a broad spectrum of fields. This has led the IUPAC to include them in the top ten emerging technologies in chemistry for 2022. This review provides an overview of aerogel-based adsorbents that have been used for the removal and recovery of uranium from aqueous environments, as well as an insight into the physicochemical parameters affecting the adsorption efficiency and mechanism. Uranium removal is of particular interest regarding uranium analysis and recovery, to cover the present and future uranium needs for nuclear power energy production. Among the methods used, such as ion exchange, precipitation, and solvent extraction, adsorption-based technologies are very attractive due to their easy and low-cost implementation, as well as the wide spectrum of adsorbents available. Aerogel-based adsorbents present an extraordinary sorption capacity for hexavalent uranium that can be as high as 8.8 mol kg–1 (2088 g kg–1). The adsorption data generally follow the Langmuir isotherm model, and the kinetic data are in most cases better described by the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. An evaluation of the thermodynamic data reveals that the adsorption is generally an endothermic, entropy-driven process (∆H0, ∆S0 > 0). Spectroscopic studies (e.g., FTIR and XPS) indicate that the adsorption is based on the formation of inner-sphere complexes between surface active moieties and the uranyl cation. Regeneration and uranium recovery by acidification and complexation using carbonate or chelating ligands (e.g., EDTA) have been found to be successful. The application of aerogel-based adsorbents to uranium removal from industrial processes and uranium-contaminated waste waters was also successful, assuming that these materials could be very attractive as adsorbents in water treatment and uranium recovery technologies. However, the selectivity of the studied materials towards hexavalent uranium is limited, suggesting further developments of aerogel materials that could be modified by surface derivatization with chelating agents (e.g., salophen and iminodiacetate) presenting high selectivity for uranyl moieties. 1.On the other hand, changes in the relative area and binding energy of carbon and oxygen peaks associated with surface active moieties after U(VI) adsorption are used as a clear indication for surface complex formation [41,44,49,59,66]. In addition, the peaks at 383 eV in the high-resolution XPS spectra associated with U4f are used to indicate complexation with surface groups [62]. EDS spectroscopy has also been applied after the adsorption tests to confirm the presence of uranium in the adsorbent material [39,55]. The information obtained from FTIR, XPS, and EDS spectroscopic studies is very useful, and the associated data clearly indicates the surface-active groups that interact and form covalent bonds with the adsorbed uranium. However, a comprehensive description of the U(VI) binding on the aerogel surface at the molecular level is missing. In this context, EXAFS measurements along with theoretical calculations (e.g., DFT calculations [49]) would provide further insight into the adsorption mechanism. In addition to the spectroscopic methods, surface zeta potentials were used to point out the role of the surface charge with respect to U(VI) adsorption by aerogels materials [41]. Regarding the evaluation of the sorption mechanism, the spectroscopic measurements are of particular interest because the thermodynamic and kinetic data obtained from the sorption experiments are not specific for a single/defined reaction but correspond to an overall sorption reaction, which is the sum of the separate sorption reactions occurring at the aerogel surface. The number of different sorption reactions depends on the surface homogeneity, the different active groups available on the surface, and the U(VI) species that dominate in solution. The latter becomes significant for pH > 4 when hydrolysis and carbonate complexation are governing the solution chemistry of U(VI) [10,11,140]. 2.9. bulk density of the aerogel material Another property that must be taken into consideration when the practical applications and real-world conditions are targeted, is the bulk density (ρb) of the aerogel material. Aerogels are famous for their extremely low bulk densities; however, in this particular case, this may not be an advantage. Indeed, our previous works [39,155] have shown that the calculation of the adsorption efficiency in g per liter (qmax(V)) of the aerogel material (instead of g per kg (qmax); Table 1) is very important and provides an estimation of the volume of the material needed for the uptake of a certain amount of uranium. For example, if we compare four aerogels from Table 1, i.e., polyureacrosslinked alginate (X-alginate; qmax = 2023 g kg–1, ρb = 150 g L–1, qmax(V) = 303 g L–1) [39], Al2O3/MgO (qmax = 1046.9 g kg–1, ρb = 18.89 g L–1, qmax(V) = 19.8 g L–1) [41], calcium alginate (qmax = 388 g kg–1, ρb = 68 g L–1, qmax(V) = 26.4 g L–1) [39], and aromatic polyurea derived from TIPM (qmax = 305 g kg–1, ρb = 150 g L–1, qmax(V) = 45.8 g L–1) [39], it is obvious that X-alginate aerogels, with the highest density among the four aerogels, outperform the other three aerogels by far. That means that for the removal of 300 g of uranium, one would need 15.9 L of Al2O3/MgO, 11 L of calcium alginate, 6.6 L of polyurea, but only 1 L of X-alginate aerogels. A detailed presentation of qmax(V) for all aerogel materials for which bulk densities are reported has been published in reference [39]. 3. conclusions and future studies Over the last decade, the number of studies concerning uranium sorption using aerogels has dramatically increased. This is because of the steadily increasing interest in the production of efficient adsorbent materials for radionuclide removal and recovery from contaminated waters. Thus, captured uranium is planned to cover the future demands of the nuclear power industry. Generally, studies are focused on the effect of different physicochemical parameters (e.g., pH, initial U(VI) concentration, ionic strength, temperature, and contact time) on the adsorption efficiency. According to those studies, the pH plays a key role because it governs both the U(VI) speciation and surface species dissociation and charge. Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 363 14 of 20
The isothermal data obtained from experiments related to the effect of metal ion concentration are best fitted by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm model, resulting in supreme sorption capacity values (in some cases even above 2000 g of uranium per kg of aerogel) that are the highest ever reported for uranium. The experimental kinetic data indicate fast sorption kinetics (equilibrium is reached in a few minutes to a few hours), and in most cases they are best fitted by the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. Both the Langmuir isotherm and the pseudo-second-order kinetic models are indicative of chemisorption. Other parameters/phenomena, however, such as the diffusion within the porous matrix of aerogels, the adsorbent dose, or the effect of the ionic strength, cannot be ignored. In addition, the associated thermodynamic data generally reveal an endothermic, entropy-driven sorption mechanism, indicating the formation of inner-sphere surface complexes. The formation of inner-sphere complexes between U(VI) and the active groups on the aerogel surfaces is supported mainly by FTIR and XPS data. Several aerogel materials show an excellent performance regarding their reuse, even after several adsorption-desorption cycles, with a relatively high uranium recovery. However, the presence of multivalent metal cations (e.g., Ca2+ or Al3+) and complexing species (e.g., CO32− or PO43−) strongly affects the sorption efficiency of the adsorbents toward uranium, because of competitive sorption and the formation of stable solution complexes, respectively, indicating a limited selectivity of the studied aerogels toward uranium (U(VI).