conclusion, carvacrol can be a lead molecule to be considered an anti-AD or antiinsectant. Humulene epoxide II belongs to epoxides and it has been docked into AChE via hydrophobic interactions with amino acid residues in AP (Phe330) and PAS (Tyr333 and Tyr120) and AS (Trp83 and Phe329) and OH (Gly117) and acylation site (His439) (Fig. 3). In this regard, humulene epoxide II has been docked into BChE through hydrophobic interactions using amino acid residues in PAS (Tyr329) and AS (Ala325, Phe326, and Trp79) (Fig. 4). Our ADMET prediction showed that it could be crossed from GIT and BBB properly without any violations against RO5 while this heterocyclic hydrocarbon has been categorized as a class  high (Class III) toxic substance (Table 3; see Supplementary file 1) and it should be considered as an insecticidal lead molecule. Isobornyl acetate, a bicyclic monoterpenoid, has been docked with the AChE catalytic acylation site (Ser199) and acylation pocket (Phe288) and Gly118, Glyc117 of the anionic site through hydrogen bonds and it interacted with Phe329 and Trp83 of AS through hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 3). Isobornyl acetate has been also interacted with BChE using hydrophobic interactions with an anionic site weaker than that of AChE (Fig. 4). In a seminal review, Wojtunik-Kulesza and colleagues [14] introduced a bunch of monoterpenes including isobornyl acetate, camphor, carvacrol, bornyl acetate, and myrtenal, among others as phytocompounds useful to treat AD Symptoms in experimental model studies. In  vitro AChE inhibitory properties of carvacrol and its derivatives have been reported [35, 36]. This study cautiously supported the dual anti-AD or antiinsectant potentials of carvacrol as a moderate ChE binder. Patuletin is a chromone that belongs to flavonols that possess potential immunosuppressive and anti-arthritic activity [37]. Patuletin has been categorized as top specific AChE binder in the present study. A spathulenol-rich extract derived from aerial parts of Anthriscus nemorosa (M. Bieb.) Spreng. (Apiaceae) has been reported as a strong AChE inhibitor [38]. The ChE inhibitory effects of terpinolene and its congeners as therapeutic agents in AD and as an antiinsectant have been reported previously (e.g., [39, 40]). According to the findings of ADMET and toxicity, benzyl valerate, bicyclic monoterpenoids (isobornyl acetate and myrtenyl acetate), monoterpene (p-cymol), and cyclic monoterpene (terpinolene) would be lead-like or even drug-like candidates with putative anti-AD activity, while the rest compounds reported here, would be considered as putative antiinsectants (vide supra). However, the bioinformatics prediction was conducted to investigate the putative interactions of myrtle phytocompounds against target proteins involved in the pathogenesis of AD (e.g., [41–43]). Finally, future investigations are requested to dig deeper into the polypharmacology of formulations and compounds of myrtle to treat AD or be employed as antiinsectants. conclusion Methyl alcohol extract of berries of MC showed overt anti-ChE activity against AChE and BChE. While the leaves of the plant itself showed less inhibitory activity on both enzymes. The in silico results were comparable with experimental findings and an array of phytochemicals found in MC including ellagic acid, esculin, patuletin, beta-chamigrene, alpha-bulnesene, beta-bourbonene and (Z)-gamma-bisabolene had more negative BA with
AChE, while ellagic acid, semimyrtucommulone, esculin, myrtucommulone A, patuletin and Juniper camphor in MC had more negative BA BChE. All compounds reported in MC showed acceptable ADMET while they were weak inhibitors of HERG therefore may lead to cardiotoxicity in large doses. This study proposed two categories of phytocompounds, namely, low class (Class I) toxic substances including beta-bourbonene, isobornyl acetate, benzyl valerate, myrtenyl acetate, p-Cymol, and terpinolene which can be used as phyto-nootropics (antiAD) for symptomatic therapy of AD or high class (class III) toxic substances including ellagic acid, esculin, alphabulnesene, myrtenyl acetate, myrtucommulone A and B, and spathulenol which can be used as antiinsectants. In sum, the most specific and strongest AChE binders derived from MC was beta-bourbonene which was marketed as a flavoring agent with permeation to the brain, however its intestinal absorption should be improved to be considered as a candidate for AD. This study categorized the pristine or natural phytocompounds of myrtle mostly as antiinsectants due to their toxic classes, however structural amendment and stereoselective synthesis like adding sulphonate or sulphamate groups to these phytocompounds may decline their toxicity and make them more suitable candidates for considering in preclinical investigations of AD. Abbreviations MC Myrtus communis L. AChE Acetylcholinesterase BChE Butyrylcholinesterase ChE Cholinesterase AD Alzheimer’s disease DTNB 5,5´-Dithiobis [2-Nitrobenzoic Acid] PDB Protein Data Bank BA Binding affinity ADMET Absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity BBB Blood-brain barrier GIT Human gastrointestinal tract HERG Human ether-a-go-go-related gene RO5 Lipinski’s rule of five OH Oxyanion hole AS Anionic subsite AP Acyl pocket PAS Peripheral anionic site