conclusions We have evaluated the multiple cage occupancy effects on the stability of the HeN@sII clathrate-like cage systems through first-principles DFT-D approaches and under a variety of P–T conditions, motivated by previously reported experimental and theoretical studies. Once we had ensured the reliability of the PW86PBE-XDM and PBE0-D4 functionals on the simplest He– He and He–H2O interactions, we performed geometry optimizations for both isolated gas-phase HeN complexes and their encapsulated analogs inside the individual (D/H) and twoadjacent (DD/DH/HH) sII clathrate-like cage systems, determining evaporation and binding energies as the number of trapped He atoms increases. Our results predict that both He@D and He2@D structures are energetically favored, with the inclusion of just one He inside the D cage being the most stable configuration, while for the H cage, the most energetically favored configurations are those including 4–6 He’s, although up to 7–8 He’s could be encapsulated. Next, by analyzing the inter-cage effects of first-neighbors, we have concluded that for the DD systems the most energetically efficient filling processes are that with just one singly occupied cage, He(1/0)@DD, and the one with doubly occupied cages, He(2/2)@DD, while in HH cages the most favored one is the doubly tetrahedrally occupied He(4/4)@HH, and in DH it is the one with singly and tetrahedrally occupied D and H cages, He(1/4)@DH. Furthermore, we have been able to verify that the presence/absence of He atoms in the neighbor sII cage clearly influences the energy and in general, the H cages seek multiple He occupancy, while on the contrary, D cages prefer minimal He filling. Finally, we have examined the stability of the multi-occupied individual D and H, as well as the double DH sII clathrate-like cages, by means of enthalpy, DH, Gibbs free energy, DG, and entropy, DS, variations. To this purpose, a wide range of temperature (50–298 K) and moderate pressure (1–1500 atm) values were selected, including the regime of experimental conditions. Our results reveal that while the formation reactions of He@D and He@H are exothermic and spontaneous in the range of experimental conditions, those associated with the formation of He2@D, He4@H and He(1/4)@DH are exothermic and mostly non-spontaneous. In order to make them
thermodynamically favored, lower temperature and/or higher pressure values are needed. In all individual cage cases studied (except He@D at high pressures) the encapsulated He atoms inside the sII cages are more orderly structured than their isolated counterparts. In summary, we have verified that the conclusions extracted from the study of the individual cages, as well as from the twoadjacent cage systems, are very similar and are in accord with the experimental observations of a multiple cage filling of He atoms (up to 4) in the H cages of the sII clathrate hydrates and single He occupancy of the D cages. Moreover, we have verified that some D sII cages may even stay empty if the stabilization provided by the overloaded H cages is enough, while the inclusion of two He atoms in D cages is possible by adjusting the thermodynamical conditions.