Pichia pastoris is the widely used expression system for producing recombinant secretory proteins. It is known that Kex2 protease plays a vital role in the process of protein secretion, in which the P1’ site affects its cleavage efficiency. To enhance the expression level of fungal defensin-derived peptide NZ2114, this work attempts to optimize the P1’ site of Kex2 by replacing it with 20 amino acids in turn. The results showed that when the amino acid of the P1’ site was changed to Phe (F), the yield of target peptide significantly increased from 2.39 g/L to 4.81 g/L. Additionally, the novel peptide F-NZ2114 (short for FNZ) showed strong antimicrobial activity against Gram-positive (G+) bacteria, especially for Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus agalactiae (MIC: 4–8 μg/mL). The FNZ was very stable and retained high activity in various conditions; in addition, a low cytotoxicity and no hemolysis were observed even at a high concentration of 128 μg/mL, and a longer postantibiotic effect was reached. The above results indicate that this engineering strategy provided a feasible optimization scheme for enhancing the expression level and druggability of this antimicrobial peptide from fungal defensin and other similar targets by this updated recombinant yeast. 1. conclusions In summary, the P1’ site of Kex2 was optimized by replacing the P1’ site with 20 amino acids, in turn, to enhance the expression level of NZ2114. It was shown that the yield significantly increased from the original 2.39 g/L to 4.81 g/L when the amino acid of the P1’ site changed to F. Additionally, the novel candidate peptide FNZ also showed a strong antibacterial activity against G+ bacteria, especially to S. aureus and S. agalactiae (MIC: 4–8 µg/mL) despite it decreased by twofold compared with the parental peptide (Table 1). The FNZ was quite stable and retained high activity in various conditions. There was no hemolysis and low cytotoxicity even at a high concentration of 128 µg/mL. Above results show a successful harvest for molecular modification on Kex2 P1’ site with the positive responses including expression, cleavage, bioactivities as antimicrobial characteristics and other druaggabilities. 