In this study, a series of new artificial luciferases (ALucs) was created using sequential insights on missing peptide blocks, which were revealed using the alignment of existing ALuc sequences. Through compensating for the missing peptide blocks in the alignment, 10 sibling sequences were artificially fabricated and named from ALuc55 to ALuc68. The phylogenetic analysis showed that the new ALucs formed an independent branch that was genetically isolated from other natural marine luciferases. The new ALucs successfully survived and luminesced with native coelenterazine (nCTZ) and its analogs in living mammalian cells. The results showed that the bioluminescence (BL) intensities of the ALucs were interestingly proportional to the length of the appended peptide blocks. The computational modeling revealed that the appended peptide blocks created a flexible region near the active site, potentially modulating the enzymatic activities. The new ALucs generated various colors with maximally approximately 90 nm redshifted BL spectra in orange upon reaction with the authors’ previously reported 1and 2-series coelenterazine analogs. The utilities of the new ALucs in bioassays were demonstrated through the construction of single-chain molecular strain probes and protein fragment complementation assay (PCA) probes. The success of this study can guide new insights into how we can engineer and functionalize marine luciferases to expand the toolbox of optical readouts for bioassays and molecular imaging. 1. conclusions In this study, a series of new artificial luciferases (ALucs) was created using sequential insights on missing peptide blocks revealed by the alignment of existing ALuc sequences. Through compensating for the missing peptide blocks in the alignment, 10 sibling sequences were artificially fabricated and named from ALuc55 to ALuc68. The constructed ALucs were phylogenetically distinctive from natural marine luciferases. All experiments found that the 10 new sibling ALucs could be created using the alignment insights and successfully work in mammalian cells as an optical readout. The optical properties were characterized with respect to the BL intensities and spectra and confirmed that the new ALucs luminesce with strong artificial colors ranging from blue to yellowish-orange, peaking at 579 nm. The optical utilities were specified using single-chain molecular strain probes and PCA probes. The optical properties were further discussed in view of the molecular modeling between the ALucs and CTZ analogs. The new ALucs can be applicable to the construction of singlechain BL probes as split reporters. 