Recycling and revalorization of waste are currently essential for sustainable growth. Mill scale, a waste product from steel production industries, which contains high levels of iron and minimal impurities, is proposed in this study as the source to synthesize magnetite nanoparticles (Fe3O4) for an enhancement of a lactate biosensor range. The synthesized Fe3O4 nanoparticles were coated with polydopamine (PDA) to prevent aggregation and degradation, creating a stable platform for immobilizing lactate oxidase enzyme (LOx) on their surfaces. The characterization of the Fe3O4@PDA material was carried out using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), and measurement of the polydispersity index (PdI). The Fe3O4@PDA-LOx material was then deposited on a screen-printed carbon electrode modified with Prussian blue (SPCE-PB) for lactate detection. The biosensor exhibited a broad, dual linear concentration-response range, one from 0.1 to 4.62 mM with a limit of detection of 0.32 mM and sensitivity of 1.54 μAmM−1cm−2, and another one from 4.62 to 149.21 mM with a limit of detection of 6.31 mM and sensitivity of 0.08 μAmM−1cm−2. The dual-range concentration response of the biosensor makes it an ideal tool for lactate determination in various applications, including sports medicine, clinical diagnosis, and industrial bioprocessing. 1. conclusions In this work, we have presented a new and innovative method to valorize mill scale in a high-added-value application such as the enhancement of a biosensor for lactate level monitoring. It runs at a very low applied potential (−0.15 V), which minimizes interfering signals from other electroactive species and increases sensitivity, leading to more reliable and efficient lactate sensing. The biosensor showed the ability to detect lactate in two distinct linear concentration ranges, one from 0.1 to 4.62 mM, with a limit of detection of 0.32 mM, and another one from 4.62 to 149.21 mM with a limit of detection of 6.31 mM, a range that expanded the current state-of-the-art electrochemical biosensors by 50% and enables the use of these sensors in such wearable applications for lactate monitoring in sweat. The proposed lactate oxidase-based biosensor exhibited good sensitivity in both concentration ranges, with a value of 1.54 µAmM−1cm−2 for the lower range, and 0.08 µAmM−1cm−2 for the higher range. This dual-range concentration response of the biosensor makes it a valuable tool for lactate determination in various applications, including sports medicine, clinical diagnosis, and industrial bioprocessing. The novel method introduced in this study represents a significant advancement in sustainable and environ-
Biosensors 2023, 13, 957 12 of 14
mentally friendly approaches to biosensor development.