Although lithium–sulfur batteries possess the highest theoretical capacity and lowest cost among all known rechargeable batteries, their commercialization is still hampered by the intrinsic disadvantages of low conductivity of sulfur and polysulfide shuttle effect, which is most critical. Considerable research efforts have been dedicated to solving these difficulties for every part of Li–S batteries. Separator modification with metal electrocatalysts is a promising approach to overcome the major part of these disadvantages. This work focuses on the development of Ni nanoparticles encapsulated in a few-layer nitrogen-doped graphene supported by nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon (Ni@NGC) with different metal loadings as separator modifications. The effect of metal loading on the Li–S electrochemical reaction kinetics and performance of Li–S batteries was investigated. Controlling the Ni loading allowed for the modulation of the surface area-to-metal content ratio, which influenced the reaction kinetics and cycling performance of Li–S cells. Among the separators with different Ni loadings, the one with 9 wt% Ni exhibited the most efficient acceleration of the polysulfide redox reaction and minimized the polysulfide shuttling effect. Batteries with this separator retained 77.2% capacity after 200 cycles at 0.5C, with a high sulfur loading of ∼4.0 mg cm−2, while a bare separator showed 51.3% capacity retention after 200 cycles under the same conditions. This work reveals that there is a vast utility space for carbon-encapsulated Ni nanoparticles in electrochemical energy storage devices with optimal selection and rational design. 1 conclusion This work presented the application of Ni@NGC with different amounts of metal loadings as an effective separator modication approach to enhance the performance of Li–S batteries. The efficient one-step carbonization and the following hot acidic treatment enabled the formation of a highly ordered Ndoped graphitic structure with encapsulated Ni nanoparticles. The separators modied with Ni@NGC with different Ni loadings performed benecially in all perspectives of battery electrochemistry towards stable cyclability and low polarization. The samples with a Ni loading of 9 wt% resulted in an effective ratio of surface area to the Ni content, which improved the reaction kinetics and cycling performance of Li–S cells. Batteries with Ni@NGC_9 retained 77% capacity aer 200 cycles at 0.5C at a high sulfur loading of ∼4.0 mg cm−2, while the cell with a bare separator retained only 51% of its capacity.