Ensuring site-selectivity in covalent chemical modification of proteins is one of the major challenges in chemical biology and related biomedical disciplines. Most current strategies either utilize the selectivity of proteases, or are based on reactions involving the thiol groups of cysteine residues. We have modified a pair of heterodimeric coiled-coil peptides to enable the selective covalent stabilization of the dimer without using enzymes or cysteine moieties. Fusion of one peptide to the protein of interest, in combination with linking the desired chemical modification to the complementary peptide, facilitates stable, regio-selective attachment of the chemical moiety to the protein, through the formation of the covalently stabilized coiled-coil. This ligation method, which is based on the formation of isoeptide and squaramide bonds, respectively, between the coiled-coil peptides, was successfully used to selectively modify the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein. Covalent stabilization of the coiled-coil also facilitated truncation of the peptides by one heptad sequence. Furthermore, selective addressing of individual positions of the peptides enabled the generation of mutually selective coiled-coils. The established method, termed Bind&Bite, can be expected to be beneficial for a range of biotechnological and biomedical applications, in which chemical moieties need to be stably attached to proteins in a siteselective fashion. conclusions Using a pair of heterodimeric coiled-coil peptides, we have developed a method for the regio-selective chemical modification of proteins that does not require the use of cysteine residues, or enzymes. The method is based on fusing the coiled-coil peptides to the protein, and to the chemical moiety, respectively, in
conjunction with covalent stabilization of the heterodimeric coiled-coil through isopeptide bonds. Using the envelope protein of HIV-1, the application of pre-activated, purified peptide precursors was shown to be a key feature of the Bind&Bite method in solution, as it prevents unspecific cross-linking associated with in situ activation of the peptide – protein complex. Furthermore, using the Bind&Bite method, the PepE sequence could be truncated by up to seven amino acid, which was not possible for the non-covalent coiled-coil. A specific hallmark of the Bind&Bite method is the possibility of generating mutually selective pairs of peptide adapters based on the same original pair of coiled-coil peptides, by individually addressing matching glutamate-lysine pairs, for the selective formation of individual isopeptide and squaramide bonds, respectively. Based on these beneficial and unique features, the Bind&Bite method can be considered a novel and highly useful addition to the growing repertoire of methods for the site-selective chemical modification of proteins.