The combination of soft responsive particles, such as microgels, with nanoparticles (NPs) yields highly versatile complexes of great potential for applications, from ad1 ar X iv :2 30 6. 15 61 7v 1 [ co nd -m at .s of t] 2 7 Ju n 20 23 hoc plasmonic sensors to controlled protocols for loading and release. However, the assembly process between these microscale networks and the co-dispersed nano-objects has not been investigated so far at the microscopic level, preempting the possibility of designing such hybrid complexes a priori. In this work, we combine state-of-theart numerical simulations with experiments, to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms taking place when microgels–NPs assembly is controlled by electrostatic interactions. We find a general behavior where, by increasing the number of interacting NPs, the microgel deswells up to a minimum size, after which a plateau behavior occurs. This occurs either when NPs are mainly adsorbed to the microgel corona via the folding of the more external chains, or when NPs penetrate inside the microgel, thereby inducing a collective reorganization of the polymer network. By varying microgel properties, such as fraction of crosslinkers or charge, as well as NPs size and charge, we further show that the microgel deswelling curves can be rescaled onto a single master curve, for both experiments and simulations, demonstrating that the process is entirely controlled by the charge of the whole microgel–NPs complex. Our results thus have a direct relevance in fundamental materials science and offer novel tools to tailor the nanofabrication of hybrid devices of technological interest. keywords soft responsive colloids, microgels, polymer network, nanoparticles, complexes, electrostatic assembly conclusions In summary, this work provides the first numerical characterization of realistic microgels in electrostatic interaction with oppositely charged NPs. The simulations are complemented
by experiments performed on cationic microgels, that assemble with negatively charged gold NPs, of interest for plasmonic applications. The aim of our investigation is to establish a microscopic model able to describe the observed microgel deswelling upon NPs addition, either by their adsorption on the microgel corona or by incorporation within the inner regions of the polymer network. The present study provides a strong confirmation that, independently of the NPs arrangement, the microgels always tend to shrink within all studied conditions. These findings are consistent with previous experimental studies, performed for different mesh sizes of the microgels, e.g. by changing crosslinker concentration, or for different NPs charge or size. In the present work, we vary all these control parameters and we also tune the arrangement of the NPs by changing the location of the ionic groups within the microgel, thus providing a unifying framework for all the different observations. Indeed, we find a general behavior where the microgels deswell up to a minimum size, which corresponds to a given amount of added NPs, varying with the specific characteristics of the system, after which a plateau behavior occurs. Above this limit, most NPs remain free in suspension because the microgel–NPs complex has now reached an overall neutrality, and long-range electrostatic interactions become repulsive when additional NPs are incorporated in the microgel. While these are well-established observations, we here provide a description of the deswelling
in terms of the microscopic changes taking place within the microgel structure. In particular, we find that when NPs are mainly located on the surface, the shrinking occurs by the folding of the more external chains and the reduction of the microgel radius of gyration is well-reproduced by the average shrinking of the gyration radii of individual chains. This is in accordance with the hypothesis that adsorbed NPs shield the repulsion between charged monomers, analogously to an increase of the ionic strength.33,35–37 Instead, when NPs penetrate inside the microgel, the individual rearrangements are not sufficient to describe the observed deswelling, but rather a collective reorganization of the chains take place, that is driven by the connectivity of the network. So, in this case, chains on average migrate towards the microgel center of mass, mainly because of their electrostatic interactions with
the inner NPs. This second scenario is more consistent with the proposed role of NPs acting as additional crosslinkers for the polymeric network.19,31–35 In both cases, however, the shrinking process can be explained in terms of the additional pressure acting on the microgel, that takes place upon addition of the NPs. Such a pressure reaches a maximum and then decreases when the interaction of the overall complex with non-adsorbed NPs becomes repulsive upon further addition of NPs. Finally all the present simulation data can be rescaled onto a single master curve, when we consider the charge of the microgel–NPs complex as the variable of interest. This plot highlights that the deswelling process roughly stops when Qcomplex reaches zero. Interestingly, the variation of the characteristics of microgel and NPs gives rise to very different morphologies for the resulting complexes, being these more or less compact or heterogeneous, undergoing more or less screening by the counterions, and most of all having NPs arranged differently within the network. Nonetheless, all these different cases are found to follow the same master behavior, that is in very good agreement with experiments, suggesting a way to control the deswelling properties of these nano-complexes by means of their microscopic features. The emergence of such a unified behavior further points towards a novel criterion to determine the amount of adsorbed NPs based on the evaluation of the effective charge of the complexes, with no need for their direct visualization: we have indeed shown that the number Nads of adsorbed NPs can be directly inferred when Qcomplex/Qmicrogel > 0, since Nads = n. Furthermore, the isoelectric point marks the deviation from complete adsorption pointing towards a very general criterion for maximizing the adsorbing efficiency of microgels. These results are relevant for all those applications, from drug delivery to pollutants removal to catalysis, where the knowledge of the precise amount of the adsorbant is crucial. For instance, the fine control on the adsorption process would boost the accuracy of microgel-mediated patterning of plasmonic NPs, where the occurrence of defects, due to scarce incorporation in the microgel, interferes with the photonic properties of the array.45 The practical translation of our criterion can drive the rational design of microgel–NPs as-
semblies by indicating a “recipe” to choose the proportions of the components, their charge, size, and morphology, with the advantage to reduce all those time-consuming development steps for the optimization of the system and removal of non-adsorbed NPs. Of course, such nanostructured systems are mostly investigated in the literature for the possibility of modulating the plasmonic properties of metallic NPs provided by the microgels responsivity. However, to be able to fully exploit these intriguing properties, we need to obtain a precise knowledge of the location of the NPs within the network, and to control this, e.g. in response to temperature. This would allow the fine tuning of the distance between adsorbed NPs and in turn the coupling of their plasmon resonances, of great interest for sensing applications. However, these may be in some cases related to specific chemical features of the complexes, and thus, it may be difficult to tackle them within a simple coarse-grained model, such as the present one. Instead, a case that would be interesting to study with the present framework is that of a much weaker electrostatic interaction, that could lead to reversible assembly and disassembly of NPs from the microgels. In the present simulations, the interactions are quite strong, even for the case q = −10 e, so that reversible association occurs very rarely during the course of the simulations. However, we repeated simulations for independent runs and such non-equilibrium effects were found not to qualitatively affect the reported results. Nonetheless, we expect that reversible association could change the present behavior at least in some aspects and, therefore. Our study therefore is meant to represent the first crucial step laying the foundation for a more systematic investigation, where microgel–NPs nanostructured complexes will be designed and optimized for applications. materials and methods  sample preparation Our experiments are performed on two different types of cationic microgels, the first with molar fraction of crosslinker monomer c = 0.05 and molar fraction of charged monomer f = 0.032, the second with c = 0.01 and f = 0.02. For the synthesis, we use the surfactant-free radical polymerization previously detailed.37,47 Briefly, we dissolve 236.67 mg of NIPAM monomers (Sigma-Aldrich, MW = 113.16 Da) and the crosslinker N,N’methylene-bis-acrylamide (BIS, Sigma-Aldrich, MW = 154.17 Da) in 26.5 ml of deionized water. Separately, the ionic initiator 2,2’-Azobis(2-methylpropionamidine) dihydrochloride (AIBA, Sigma-Aldrich, MW = 271.19 Da) is dissolved in 1.2 ml of water. The solution containing NIPAM and BIS is bubbled with argon for 30 minutes and, after heating up to 70 °C, the initiator solution is added. In this way, in the final solution, the mass fraction of NIPAM is 0.0085. At 70 °C, AIBA undergoes homolytic cleavage forming two radicals. Each of them reacts with a NIPAM monomer and produces a new radical, giving rise to the polymerization reaction. Therefore, after starting the reaction, AIBA initiator remains attached to the backbone of the microgels and provides them positive charge, due to the protonation of amine groups. After 6–hour reaction, the obtained dispersion is coo The observables used to study each chain k and its interaction with NPs are the number ℓk of monomers per chain. the total charge qk, namely the number of charged monomers in the chain, the radial position r⃗k of the chain, defined as the distance of its center of mass from the one of the microgel, the distance dk from the closest NP, defined as the minimum monomer-NP distance among monomers of the chain, and the chain gyration radius Rgk, defined as in Eq. 7, where the sum is computed only over the monomers of the chain, thus N and r⃗CM are replaced by ℓk and r⃗k. The charges of the microgel Qmicrogel and of the microgel–NPs complex Qcomplex are defined as the total charge of the microgel and of all the particles (counterions and NPs) embedded into it, identified as those with distance from the microgel center of mass shorter than RH .