Beauty tea with special flavor can be affected by the degree of leafhopper puncturing. The present research adopted widely targeted metabolomics to analyze the characteristic metabolites of fresh tea leaves and beauty tea with different degrees of leafhopper puncturing. Low-puncturing beauty tea (LPBT) exhibited a superior quality. Altogether, 95 and 65 differential metabolites, including tea polyphenols, saccharides, and lipids, were identified from fresh leaves and beauty tea, respectively. The partial least squares regression (PLSR) analysis results showed that isomaltulose, theaflavic acid, and ellagic acid, may be the characteristic metabolites that form the different taste outlines of beauty tea. Based on odor activity values (OAVs) and partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), dihydrolinalool and cis-linalool oxide were identified as characteristic volatile components, which may be essential for the formation of the different aroma characteristic of beauty tea. The results provide a theoretical basis for selecting raw materials, performing quality research, and developing beauty tea industrially. 1. conclusions Our results showed that the metabolites in beauty tea were affected by different puncturing degrees of tea green leafhopper. A low puncturing degree of fresh tea leaves is more conducive to improving the quality of beauty tea. The degree of leafhopper puncturing affects the isomaltulose, 12-O-Î2-D-glucopyranosyloxyjasmonic acid, achimilic acid, theaflavic acid, ellagic acid, procyanidin A2, EC-(4β→8)-EGC 3-O-gallate, EC 3-O-gallate(4β→6)-EGC 3-O-gallate, EGC-(4β→8)-EC 3-O-gallate, neotheaflavin 3-gallate, L-theanine, linalool 3,6-oxide primeveroside, and linalool oxide D 3-[apiosyl-(1→6)-glucoside] levels, thus forming the different taste outlines of beauty tea. In addition, the dihydrolinalool and cis-linalool oxide levels may be mainly affected by the degree of leafhopper puncturing, thus forming the different aroma profile of beauty tea.