Recently, rare diseases have received attention due to the need for improvement in diagnosed patients’ and their families’ lives. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a rare, severe, progressive, muscle-wasting disease. Today, the therapeutic standard for treating DMD is corticosteroids, which cause serious adverse side effects. Nutraceuticals, e.g., herbal extracts or essential oils (EOs), are possible active substances to develop new drug delivery systems to improve DMD patients’ lives. New drug delivery systems lead to new drug effects, improved safety and accuracy, and new therapies for rare diseases. Herbal extracts and EOs combined with click chemistry can lead to the development of safer treatments for DMD. In this review, we focus on the need for novel drug delivery systems using EOs as the therapy for DMD and the potential use of click chemistry for drug delivery systems. New EO complex drug delivery systems may offer a new approach for improving muscle conditions and mental health issues associated with DMD. In this review, we discuss possibilities for applying EOs to DMD before implementing expensive research in a theoretical way. 1. conclusions In conclusion, the development of new EO complex drug delivery systems using click chemistry methods may offer a new approach for improving muscle conditions and mental health issues associated with DMD. These systems can potentially improve the bioavailability and effectiveness of EOs, which have been traditionally used in aromatherapy to alleviate symptoms of anxiety and depression. Currently, corticosteroids are the therapeutic standard for treating DMD, which can prolong ambulation and muscle function and cause serious adverse side effects. If a nutraceutical, e.g., herbal extracts or EOs, could produce similar therapeutic benefits to corticosteroids without adverse side effects, it could provide many DMD patients with an improved quality of life as well as reduce costs associated with recurrent hospital visits to monitor and treat corticosteroid-induced side effects [8]. This review is written to encourage the application of scientific knowledge by EOs to DMD research.