Astaxanthin (3,3-dihydroxy-β, β-carotene-4,4-dione) is a ketocarotenoid synthesized by Haematococcus pluvialis/lacustris, Chromochloris zofingiensis, Chlorococcum, Bracteacoccus aggregatus, Coelastrella rubescence, Phaffia rhodozyma, some bacteria (Paracoccus carotinifaciens), yeasts, and lobsters, among others However, it is majorly synthesized by Haematococcus lacustris alone (about 4%). The richness of natural astaxanthin over synthetic astaxanthin has drawn the attention of industrialists to cultivate and extract it via two stage cultivation process. However, the cultivation in photobioreactors is expensive, and converting it in soluble form so that it can be easily assimilated by our digestive system requires downstream processing techniques which are not cost-effective. This has made the cost of astaxanthin expensive, prompting pharmaceutical and nutraceutical companies to switch over to synthetic astaxanthin. This review discusses the chemical character of astaxanthin, more inexpensive cultivating techniques, and its bioavailability. Additionally, the antioxidant character of this microalgal product against many diseases is discussed, which can make this natural compound an excellent drug to minimize inflammation and its consequences. 1. conclusions Astaxanthin is a super ketocarotenoid with unique chemical isomerization in different source organisms. However, astaxanthin from Haematococcus lacustris is most widely cultivated because of its safe and strong antioxidant nature. Haematococcus lacustris can be mass cultivated and to produce a novel drug and dietary supplement if the cost of its production can be reduced using different techniques and strategies. Further the bioavailability of astaxanthin dosage is an important factor that requires a deeper study and extensive research if it is multifunctional applications in different pharmaceutical, nutraceutical, cosmetic and dietary industries are be considered. Development of innovative drugs such as natural astaxanthin from microorganisms, and especially from Haematococcus lacustris, can lead to solutions for enormous scientific, clinical, and societal problems. Outbreaks of infectious diseases have created major public health emergencies globally. Sustained and consistent research is required to enhance our knowledge of key aspects of viral pathogenesis that can lead to improved precautionary and therapeutic policies.