This work adopted a green synthesis route using cashew tree gum as a mediating agent to obtain Ni-doped ZnO nanoparticles through the sol–gel method. Structural analysis confirmed the formation of the hexagonal wurtzite phase and distortions in the crystal lattice due to the inclusion of Ni cations, which increased the average crystallite size from 61.9 nm to 81.6 nm. These distortions resulted in the growth of point defects in the structure, which influenced the samples’ optical properties, causing slight reductions in the band gaps and significant increases in the Urbach energy. The fitting of the photoluminescence spectra confirmed an increase in the concentration of zinc vacancy defects (VZn) and monovacancies (Vo) as Zn cations were replaced by Ni cations in the ZnO structure. The percentage of VZn defects for the pure compound was 11%, increasing to 40% and 47% for the samples doped with 1% and 3% of Ni cations, respectively. In contrast, the highest percentage of VO defects is recorded for the material with the lowest Ni ions concentration, comprising about 60%. The influence of dopant concentration was also reflected in the photocatalytic performance. Among the samples tested, the Zn0.99Ni0.01O compound presented the best result in MB degradation, reaching an efficiency of 98.4%. Thus, the recovered material underwent reuse tests, revealing an efficiency of 98.2% in dye degradation, confirming the stability of the photocatalyst. Furthermore, the use of different inhibitors indicated that •OH radicals are the main ones involved in removing the pollutant. This work is valuable because it presents an ecological synthesis using cashew gum, a natural polysaccharide that has been little explored in the literature. 1. conclusions The sol–gel method and cashew gum polysaccharide were used to synthesize pure and Ni-doped ZnO nanoparticles successfully. XRD and Raman analyses established that ZnO had a typical hexagonal wurtzite structure, and no secondary phases were detected. Distortions were observed in the ZnO crystal lattice, which are associated with the difference between the ionic radii of the Ni and Zn cations and which are reflected in changes in the crystallite size (61.9–81.5 nm). These distortions increased the density of vacancy defects in the structure of the compounds, which affected the optical and photoluminescence properties, as indicated by DRS and PL analyses. SEM analyses revealed that the systems are modeled by clusters of spherical particles. In the photocatalytic tests, the NZ1 sample showed better performance in removing the MB dye (98.4%), indicating that the ideal dopant concentration can influence the photocatalytic performance. MB removal was attributed to •OH radicals based on inhibitor tests. This compound also remained stable during free reuse tests, maintaining a photocatalytic efficiency of 98.2%. Therefore, within the established conditions, the doped materials had excellent efficiency in MB degradation and showed promise for new photocatalytic studies.