Two diphenyl formamidine ligands, four dirhodium(II,II) complexes, and three axially modified low-valent dirhodium(II,II) metallodendrimers were synthesized and evaluated as anticancer agents against the A2780, A2780cis, and OVCAR-3 human ovarian cancer cell lines. The dirhodium(II,II) complexes show moderate cytotoxic activity in the tested tumor cell lines, with acetate and methyl-substituted formamidinate compounds displaying increased cytotoxicity that is relative to cisplatin in the A2780cis cisplatin resistant cell line. Additionally, methyland fluorosubstituted formamidinate complexes showed comparable and increased cytotoxic activity in the OVCAR-3 cell line when compared to cisplatin. The low-valent metallodendrimers show some activity, but a general decrease in cytotoxicity was observed when compared to the precursor complexes in all but one case, which is where the more active acetate-derived metallodendrimer showed a lower IC50 value in the OVCAR-3 cell line in comparison with the dirhodium(II,II) tetraacetate. 1. conclusions In summary, new trivalent metallodendrimers bearing dirhodium(II,II) complexes bound on the periphery were prepared in good yields (76–84%); they were characterized by various spectroscopic and analytical techniques. The dirhodium compounds 2–6 show a cytotoxicity that was greater than or comparable to carboplatin in the A2780 cell line; none of which, however, exceeded the cytotoxicity of cisplatin in this cell line. Compounds 3 and 5 showed an approximate two-fold increase in cytotoxicity in the A2780cis cell line when compared to cisplatin and carboplatin, whereas compounds 4 and 5 show the highest antiproliferative effect of the synthesized compounds in the OVCAR-3 cell line. Generally, the results for dendritic complexes (8–10) show a decrease in cytotoxicity when compared
to the bimetallic precursor complexes, with acetate-containing metallodendrimer (8) displaying the greatest antiproliferative effect for the macromolecular series of compounds. Compound 5 shows promising cytotoxicity against highly proliferative human ovarian tumor cell lines in vitro, having a comparable to, or greater, activity in comparison to the tested platinum-based drugs, with similar efficacy observed across all tested cell lines. 