This study explores an eco-friendly method for recovering platinum group metals from a synthetic automotive three-way catalyst (TWC). Bioleaching of palladium (Pd) using the thiosulfatecopper-ammonia leaching processes, with biogenic thiosulfate sourced from a bioreactor used for biogas biodesulfurization, is proposed as a sustainable alternative to conventional methods. Biogenic thiosulfate production was optimized in a gas-lift bioreactor by studying the pH (8–10) and operation modes (batch and continuous) under anoxic and microaerobic conditions for 35 d. The maximum concentration of 4.9 g S2O3 L−1 of biogenic thiosulfate was reached under optimal conditions (batch mode, pH = 10, and airflow rate 0.033 vvm). To optimize Pd bioleaching from a ground TWC, screening through a Plackett–Burman design determined that oxygen and temperature significantly affected the leaching yield negatively and positively, respectively. Based on these results, an optimization through an experimental design was performed, indicating the optimal conditions to be Na2S2O3 1.2 M, CuSO4 0.03 M, (NH4)2SO4 1.5 M, Na2SO3 0.2 M, pH 8, and 60 ◦C. A remarkable 96.2 and 93.2% of the total Pd was successfully extracted from the solid at 5% pulp density using both commercially available and biogenic thiosulfate, highlighting the method’s versatility for Pd bioleaching from both thiosulfate sources. 1. conclusions In conclusion, this study explored an innovative and environmentally friendly approach for the recovery of PGMs, focusing on the bioleaching of Pd from spent synthetic catalysts. The presented research introduces a novel method involving the utilization of a thiosulfate-copper-ammonia complex, with a unique twist—the incorporation of renewable biogenic thiosulfate obtained from a bioreactor engaged in the biodesulfurization of biogas. To achieve this, the production of biogenic thiosulfate was optimized by studying operational parameters such as pH, electron acceptors, and operation mode. Notably, a transition to the batch mode with aerobic conditions at pH 10 proved most effective for biogenic thiosulfate production. Under the most favorable conditions (batch mode, aerobic conditions, pH = 10, and an airflow rate of 0.033 vvm), a maximum concentration of 4.9 g L−1 of biogenic thiosulfate was obtained. However, the biomass growth resulting from the batch operation led to a subsequent decline in thiosulfate levels, indicating the potential utilization of thiosulfate as an energy source. The Pd bioleaching from the ground catalyst was subject to optimization, indicating the ideal conditions for Pd bioleaching to be Na2S2O3 1.2 M, CuSO4 0.03 M, (NH4)2SO4 1.5 M, Na2SO3 0.2 M, pH 8, and a temperature of 60 ◦C. The feasibility of using biogenic thiosulfate in the Pd bioleaching process was demonstrated achieving extraction rates of 93.2% of the total Pd from the solid. This underscores the viability of the proposed method as a sustainable and effective approach for Pd recovery from spent TWCs, addressing the growing demand for PGMs and contributing to the responsible utilization of critical raw materials in automotive catalysts. The central aim of upcoming studies is to optimize the recovery of platinum group metals from automotive catalysts, achieving a balance among efficiency, environmental responsibility, and economic feasibility.