conclusions In the present study, we explored the polymorphism of human insulin in the presence of zinc and thiocyanate ions in the pH range 4.5–8.5. With increasing pH HI forms T6 and T3R f 3 hexamers, while at pH > 7.35 only T2 dimers were observed in a cubic crystal symmetry. The angular and d-spacing resolution of the collected XRPD data motivated us to refine the structure of the cubic polymorph by employing a multi-profile and stereochemically restrained Rietveld refinement. The flexible rigid-body description of amino acids in GSAS proved to be essential for a robust refinement at 2.7 Å resolution, while we employed synchrotron and laboratory diffraction data in a combined refinement to benefit from the strengths of each instrumentation setup. Despite our concerns due to the high symmetry of the crystals, refinement proved to be feasible. The polycrystalline cubic insulin structure exhibits some notable differences from other single-crystal structures of the same polymorph, especially in the conformation of the N-terminal region of chain B. We hypothesize that a translocation in LeuA16 increases the size of the hydrophobic cavity which typically houses PheB1, allowing it to adopt a new conformation, termed the Oc state. Our molecular-dynamics simulations suggested that this Oc state is less flexible than the typical Ic state of the cubic polymorph and other T-like states, implying that this is a more rigid conformation of human insulin. The observed phase transitions are entirely pH-driven. Strikingly, we observed a transition to a zinc-free cubic insulin
state despite the presence of zinc in solution. We argue that these transitions are a result of the increase in electrostatic repulsion between neighboring GluB13 residues as a result of pH variation. Further investigations of these pH-driven phase transitions, in terms of varying zinc-to-insulin and thiocyanateto-insulin ratios, are required to test our hypotheses, as well as single-crystal X-ray diffraction experiments to yield higher resolution structural models.