Protein import and oxidative folding within the intermembrane space (IMS) of mitochondria relies on the MIA40–ERV1 couple. The MIA40 oxidoreductase usually performs substrate recognition and oxidation and is then regenerated by the FAD-dependent oxidase ERV1. In most eukaryotes, both proteins are essential; however, MIA40 is dispensable in Arabidopsis thaliana. Previous complementation experiments have studied yeast mia40 mutants expressing a redox inactive, but import-competent versions of yeast Mia40 using A. thaliana ERV1 (AtERV1) suggest that AtERV1 catalyzes the oxidation of MIA40 substrates. We assessed the ability of both yeast and Arabidopsis MIA40 and ERV1 recombinant proteins to oxidize the apo-cytochrome reductase CCMH and the cytochrome c oxidase assembly protein COX19, a typical MIA40 substrate, in the presence or absence of glutathione, using in vitro cysteine alkylation and cytochrome c reduction assays. The presence of glutathione used at a physiological concentration and redox potential was sufficient to support the oxidation of COX19 by AtERV1, providing a likely explanation for why MIA40 is not essential for the import and oxidative folding of IMS-located proteins in Arabidopsis. The results point to fundamental biochemical differences between Arabidopsis and yeast ERV1 in catalyzing protein oxidation. 1. conclusions The results presented in this study highlight the specificities of the plant ERV1–MIA40 pathway towards GSH and two IMS proteins, COX19 and CCMH. It is first interesting to note that the Arabidopsis ERV1–MIA40 couple is not able to oxidize CCMH well. This may explain why no reducing system has been identified in plants so far, unlike in bacteria such as E. coli, where reduction of the periplasmic ortholog is assisted by CcmG using electrons coming from the cytoplasm and transferred via the membrane CcdA protein [59]. One of the differences between these systems is the presence of high GSH concentrations in the IMS and, eventually, of glutaredoxins, although this remains to be established for plants. The second important conclusion is the observation that the in vitro requirement of MIA40 for COX19 oxidation is abolished when ERV1 and physiological concentrations of glutathione provided at a relevant redox potential are present. The capacity of AtERV1 to bypass the AtMIA40 function in vitro may actually explain why AtERV1 was able to complement a yeast mia40 mutant, restoring the amount of MIA40 substrates [40], and why the role of AtMIA40 is dispensable in A. thaliana, but not in opisthokonts.