Polyketides are an important class of structurally diverse natural products derived from a precursor molecule consisting of a chain of alternating ketone and methylene groups. These compounds have attracted the worldwide attention of pharmaceutical researchers since they are endowed with a wide array of biological properties. As one of the most common filamentous fungi in nature, Aspergillus spp. is well known as an excellent producer of polyketide compounds with therapeutic potential. By extensive literature search and data analysis, this review comprehensively summarizes Aspergillus-derived polyketides for the first time, regarding their occurrences, chemical structures and bioactivities as well as biosynthetic logics. 1. conclusions and perspectives In summary, the genus Aspergillus is a prolific source of polyketides with diverse chemical structures and a variety of biological activities. Many of these substances or derivatives have therapeutic effects, such as the immunosuppressant agent (3), the antioxidant benzaldehydes (34,35), the α-glucosidase inhibitors (327–330), etc. Furthermore, the potential to discover novel polyketides from Aspergillus strains is still immense since a great number of their BGCs are shown to be inactive or unawakened under traditional culture conditions [159]. With the development and application of bioinformative tools and analytical techniques, more and more Aspergillus genomes, as well as functional genes, will be sequenced and annotated. These silent BGCs responsible for the biosynthesis of novel polyketides are being disclosed and activated using new strategies, such as the one strain many compounds (OSMAC) approach and genome mining combined with metabolic engineering [8,160,161]. In addition, the biosynthesis of polyketides from acyl-CoA thioesters
J. Fungi 2023, 9, 261 18 of 24
is catalyzed by various PKSs, which structures of initiation and condensation domains provide valuable insights into the molecular factors governing starter unit selectivity and chain-length control. A detailed understanding of these PKS structural features controlling polyketide biosynthesis and modification offers a powerful tool for the controlled and rational design of novel polyketides through enzyme engineering.