β‐ionone (ION) is a cyclic terpenoid compound that demonstrates considerable potential for the prevention and treatment of cancer. However, the water solubility of β‐ionone is poor and the compound demonstrates low permeability. Liposomes have been reported as increasing both qualities. In this study, the development of β‐ionone liposomes was initiated by adding 1,2‐dioleoyl‐ 3‐trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP) to produce cationic liposomes as a means of enhancing binding to cancer cells. Liposomes composed of β‐ionone, HSPC, cholesterol, and DSPE‐mPEG2000 were prepared using the thin layer hydration method. Cellular uptake studies were carried out with HeLa cells incubated with β‐ionone liposomes for two hours. The results indicated that the addition of DOTAP increased particle size and affected the spectroscopical and thermogram profiles of the liposomes, thereby confirming reduction in liposome crystallinity, while the zeta potential became positive. Moreover, the calcein release profile further showed that additional DOTAP increased both membrane fluidity and cellular uptake in HeLa cells In conclusion, adding DOTAP affected the physicochemical cationic properties of liposome and improved cellular uptake in HeLa cells. the effect of 1 ,2‑ dio leo yl‑ 3‑ t rim eth ylammonium propane (DOTAP) Addition on the physical characteristics of β‑ionone liposomes Andang Miatmoko 1,2*, Febe Harum Asmoro 1, Andre Alwi Azhari 1, Noorma Rosita 1 & chin‑shiu huang 3 β‑ionone (ION) is a cyclic terpenoid compound that demonstrates considerable potential for the prevention and treatment of cancer. However, the water solubility of β‑ionone is poor and the compound demonstrates low permeability. Liposomes have been reported as increasing both qualities. In this study, the development of β‑ionone liposomes was initiated by adding 1,2‑dioleoyl‑ 3‑trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP) to produce cationic liposomes as a means of enhancing binding to cancer cells. Liposomes composed of β‑ionone, HSPC, cholesterol, and DSPE‑mPEG2000 were prepared using the thin layer hydration method. Cellular uptake studies were carried out with HeLa cells incubated with β‑ionone liposomes for two hours.  This greater cell uptake leading to increased coumarin-6 levels and microscopic observations of HeLa cells showed that the intensity of coumarin-6 rose with the occurrence of higher DOTAP levels. The IC50 cytotoxicity test was carried out on HeLa cells to determine the effect of adding DOTAP to β-ionone liposomes in cancer therapy. Unfortunately, β-ionone liposomes had no cytotoxic effects even though the cellular uptake test results show that liposomes entered the cells. This result indicates that it is possible that these cells are not sensitive to β-ionone, which becomes the limitation of our study. Therefore, a cytotoxicity test was carried out by co-encapsulating DOXO into β-ionone liposomes (ION-DOXO-DOTAP liposomes). DOXO has been known as an anticancer compound sensitive to HeLa cells and T47D cells. The results showed that the ION-DOXO-DOTAP liposomes had toxicity to both cancer cells. The ION-DOXO-DOTAP-2 had the highest cytotoxicity. Compared to the ION-DOXO-DOTAP-0, which had no DOTAP addition, the toxicity is relatively similar to that of DOXO. This is related to liposome formulations with the addition of DOTAP providing better retention than liposomes without DOTAP. The increased drug release was proportional to the cell uptake, which also increased with the addition of DOTAP. This result is in line with the study of Lei et al. (2011), where it was reported that cytotoxicity results were associated with cellular uptake. Therefore, high cellular uptake will give an increased cytotoxicity value47. conclusions The results of this study indicate that the addition of DOTAP to β-ionone liposomes increased the particle size slightly and rendered the charge of the liposomes positive. In addition, the higher the DOTAP concentration added, the more fluid the liposomal membrane as indicated by the reduction in membrane crystallinity which supported the higher calcein release from the liposomes. The conclusions The results of this study indicate that the addition of DOTAP to β-ionone liposomes increased the particle size slightly and rendered the charge of the liposomes positive. In addition, the higher the DOTAP concentration added, the more fluid the liposomal membrane as indicated by the reduction in membrane crystallinity which supported the higher calcein release from the liposomes. The introduction of DOTAP into liposomes highly affects the physical properties of β-ionone liposomes, thereby increasing the cellular uptake and cytotoxicity. From the results of this analysis, although the addition of DOTAP renders the liposomes more fluid, its ability to enhance the cellular uptake provides potential benefits when used as a delivery system for cancer therapy. materials and methods Materials. In this study, β-ionone was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. (Saint Louis, USA). The liposome component was 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP), Hydrogenated Soybean Phosphatidylcholine (HSPC), and Distearoyl-glycerophosphoethanolamine–N–(Carbonyl-methoxy polyethylene glycol 2000 (DSPE-mPEG2000), which were products of Nof Corporation (Tokyo, Japan). Cholesterol was obtained from Wako Inc., Ltd. (Osaka, Japan), while calcein (Fluorexone®) was a product of Nacalai Tesque Inc. (Kyoto, Japan). The buffer components include phosphate buffer pH 7.4, KH2PO4, Na2HPO4, NaCl, and KCl were purchased from Merck Inc. (Darmstadt, Germany). Chloroform and methanol were products of Merck Inc. (Darmstadt, Germany). Other reagents and materials used were of non-technical grade. Preparation of β‑ionone liposomes. β-ionone liposomes were prepared by the thin film hydration method. First, β-ionone, DOTAP, HSPC, DSPE-mPEG2000, and cholesterol were dissolved in chloroform. As shown in Table 2, appropriate amounts of each solution were, mixed in a round bottom flask. The chloroform was then evaporated and completely removed using a rotary evaporator at 55 °C to form a thin film layer on the flask wall. The thin film formed was hydrated with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4 and sonicated using a sonicator at 55 °C for 10  min27. Extrusion was subsequently carried out with an extruder (Avanti®, Mini Extruder, Avanti Polar Lipid Inc., Alabama, USA) by passing liposomes through a polycarbonate membrane with various pore sizes, i.e., 400, 200, and 100 nm, with a heating block at a temperature of 55–60 °C to produce liposomes approximately 100 nm in size42. Evaluation of physical characteristics of β‑ionone liposomes. The particle size of β-ionone liposomes were determined by the dynamic light scattering method using a Delsa Nano C Particle Analyzer at 25 °C. Meanwhile, the zeta potential was measured using the electrophoresis light scattering method using the Malvern Zetasizer Nano Series Analyzer at 25 °C at the Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology (ITS), Surabaya, Indonesia. The liposomes were diluted with demineralized water, placed in a cuvette, and measured for particle size and zeta potential27. 10
Vol:. (1234567890)
Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:4324 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-31560-5
Evaluation of vesicle morphology of β‑ionone liposomes using transmission electron micros‑ copy (TEM). Liposome morphology, determined using the JEOL JEM-1400 TEM (Jeol Inc., USA) instrument, was carried out at the Laboratory of Chemistry of Gadjah Mada University (UGM), Yogyakarta, Indonesia. Liposomes were first diluted using demineralized water at a volume ratio of 1:5 of liposome and water respectively. The sample was subsequently stained with 4% phosphotungstic acid at a ratio of 1:1. Samples were placed on a copper grid, and images taken at various magnification sizes15. Fourier‑transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) Analysis of β‑Ionone Liposomes. FTIR evaluation was carried out to determine molecular interactions within the liposomes. Before the analysis, each β-ionone liposome was hydrated with PBS pH 7.4 containing 7% sucrose and freeze dried. FTIR analysis was then conducted using an FTIR Alpha II Spectrophotometer (Bruker, Ettlingen, Germany). The sample was put into the sample container and the spectra measured at wave numbers of 4000–600  cm-1. Differential thermal analysis (DTA) of β‑ionone liposomes. DTA is used to evaluate changes in sample properties evident from the endothermic and exothermic peaks on the DTA thermogram when heat is applied. The tests were carried out using a DTA instrument (Mettler Toledo FP90, Switzerland). Each β-ionone liposome was hydrated with PBS pH 7.4 containing 7% sucrose and freeze-dried before analysis. The freezedried samples were placed in aluminum crucibles and heated from 30 to 300 °C at the rate of 10 °C/min27. Evaluation of calcein release. Preparation of β‑ionone liposomes containing calcein for release study. The β-ionone liposomes were prepared on the basis of the above method. The thin lipid film formed was then hydrated with 1 mL of PBS pH 5.0 containing 3.4 mM calcein (Nacalai Tesque Inc., Kyoto, Japan). Extrusion was subsequently carried out with an extruder (Avanti®, Mini Extruder, Avanti Polar Lipid Inc., Alabama, USA) by passing liposomes through a polycarbonate membrane with various pore sizes of 400, 200, and 100 nm with a heating block at 55–60°C42. The free calcein was subsequently separated from the liposomes by placing them into the Amicon® Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Unit tube with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) of 10,000 Da (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). The tube was centrifuged using a Hettich Rotofix 32 Benchtop Centrifuge (Hettich Lab., Tuttlingen, Germany) at 3500 rpm in order to remove the unentrapped or free calcein. Calcein release assay from β‑ionone liposomes. A calcein release study was conducted by dialysis. The liposomes were placed in the Spectra/Por®7 dialysis membrane with MWCO (Spectrum Laboratories, USA) of 3500 Da. 50 mL of PBS pH 7.4 was employed as a release medium with a stirring speed of 350 rpm at 37 °C. C. Sampling was performed at 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48 h by replacing some samples with the same volume of fresh PBS pH 7.4. The calcein fluorescence intensity was subsequently measured using the GloMax®-Multi Detection System (Promega Corporation, Madison, USA) microplate reader at λex = 475 nm and λem = 500–550 nm. The cellular uptake assay of β‑ionone liposomes. Preparation of β‑ionone liposomes containing cou‑ marin‑6 as the fluorescent labeling agent. The first procedure involved dissolving each liposome component in chloroform. Liposomes were prepared according to the formula in the Table 2 by adding 0.3 mg Coumarin-6 to each mL of liposomes containing 9.7 mg total lipid of HSPC, Cholesterol, and DSPE-mPEG2000. The amount of coumarin-6 added was in accordance with the previous study of Miatmoko et al. (2021), which successfully represented liposome uptake in cancer cells48. Each component solution was appropriately mixed in a round bottom flask covered with aluminum foil. The organic solvent was then placed in a rotary evaporator at a temperature of 55 °C until all organic solvents were removed and formed a thin film which was hydrated using 1 mL of PBS pH 7.4, vortexed, and sonicated for 10 mins at 55 °C. Liposomes were subsequently extruded using polycarbonate membranes of sizes from 400, 200, to 100 nm to produce liposomes with a size of about 100 nm. The cellular uptake assay. Initially, the HeLa cells, which were obtained from Stem Cell Research and Development Center, Universitas Airlangga, were suspended in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% Penicillin–Streptomycin antibiotic at a concentration of 1 × 106 cells/mL, placed into a 6-well plate, and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 environment for 24 h. Cells can be used for cellular uptake assay if they have a confluence of 70–80%44. The medium was replaced with β-ionone liposomes at a coumarin-6 concentration of 10 μg/mL and incubated for two hours, with the media being disposed of. The cells were first twice washed with PBS pH 7.4 and then added to 1 mL of methanol and left for 5–10 mins. After the methanol had been discarded, the cells were washed twice with PBS pH 7.4, containing 0.5% Tween 80 and approximately 1 mL of PBS pH 7.4 containing 1% FBS was added and left for 15 min. The cells were then washed twice with PBS solution pH 7.4. The final step was to observe the cells by means of a fluorescence microscope with an FITC filter44. Measurement of coumarin‑6 levels in HeLa cells. In the first step, the cells were prepared with the same procedure as that for the cellular uptake assay and the samples were incubated for two hours. The medium was then discarded and the cells washed twice with PBS pH 7.4. In order to measure the amount of intra-cellular coumarin-6, the cells were lysed with 100 μL of lysis buffer containing 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 0.5% Triton X-100 by means of pipetting and added to 900 μL PBS pH 7.4 to enable collection of the samples. The cell suspension was vortexed and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for ten minutes. After centrifugation, the supernatant’s fluorescence intensity was measured using GloMax®-Multi Detection System (Promega Corporation, Madison, USA) microplate reader at λex = 475 nm and λem = 500–550  nm44. 11
Vol. :(0123456789)
Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:4324 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-31560-5
In vitro cytotoxicity assay. Preparation of liposomes containing doxorubicin. In addition to β-ionone liposomes, we prepared β-ionone liposomes co-loaded with Doxorubicin (DOXO) to produce ION-DOXODOTAP liposomes and evaluate their cytotoxicities on T47D and HeLa cells. β-ionone liposomes co-loaded with DOXO were prepared by the same formula and methods as β-ionone liposomes; however, the 0.65  M Triethylamine was used as the hydrating solution. The liposomes were then eluted through a column packed with Sephadex G50 using PBS pH 7.4. DOXO was added at DOX/total lipid ratio of 1:5, respectively, and the mixture was then incubated in a water bath at 60 °C for 10 min. The liposomes were further separated from the free DOXO by elution through the Sephadex G50 gel column. WST assay. The in vitro cytotoxicity test procedure was evaluated for T47D cells and HeLa cells using the WST-1 assay method. The T47D and HeLa cell were obtained from Stem Cell Research and Development Center, Universitas Airlangga, and then cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 medium containing 10% Fetal Bovine serum and 1% Penicillin Streptomycin in a humidified atmosphere at 37 °C with 5% CO2 air supply. For the assay, T47D and HeLa cells with a concentration of 5 × 103 cells were added to each well of 96-well plates and incubated for 24 h before treatment. To evaluate the cytotoxicity, β-ionone liposomes and β -ionone liposomes co-loaded with DOXO were prepared at various concentrations. These samples were added to each well containing the cells and incubated for 48 h. After the treatment, the cell number was determined using WST-1 assay. The cell viability was determined as the relative measurement to the untreated cells by evaluating the absorbance of each well at 440 nm using a microplate reader. The IC50 values of the compounds were calculated using the percentage of living cells and analyzed using SPSS (probit) software. Data analysis. The data for analysis consisted of the average ± standard deviation measured in replications. First, a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to analyze the numerical data s for normal distribution. If the data was normal (P value ≥ 0.05), the quantitative analysis was analyzed using One Way Analysis of Variance. If the P value < 0.05, the data analysis was followed by a post hoc test incorporating the use of Honestly Significant Difference (HSD). The analysis was conducted using the IBM SPSS Statistics software version 24. data availability The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Received: 27 September 2022; Accepted: 14 March 2023 acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Ms. Berlian Sarasitha Hariawan and Ms. Devy Maulidya Cahyani for kind assistantship for manuscript preparation. author contributions A.M.: (1) conception and design of the work, data acquisition, data analysis and interpretation; (2) critically revising the article for important intellectual content; (3) Final approval of the version to be published; (4) Agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. F.H.A. : (1) conception and design of the work, data acquisition, data analysis and interpretation; (2) Drafting the article; (3) Final approval of the version to be published; (4) Agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. A.A.A. : (1) conception and design of the work, data acquisition, data analysis and interpretation; (2) Drafting the article; (3) Final approval of the version to be published; (4) Agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. N.R. : (1) data analysis and interpretation; (2) critically revising the article for important intellectual content; (3) Final approval of the version to be published; (4) Agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.