a-Lipoic acid (ALA) is a naturally occurring sulfur-containing fatty acid with high antioxidant activity. It is also used to treat diabetes, nerve pain, weight loss, heart disease, and primary mitochondrial disorders. Moreover, numerous therapeutic agents have been studied for managing other clinical conditions, including for anticancer, anti-HIV, anti-inflammatory, and anti-AD treatments. The medicinal importance of ALA, especially its biologically active form (R-ALA), has attracted considerable attention from synthetic chemists in industrial and academic fields. In this review, we discuss synthetic approaches to ALA and RALA over the past 70 years (1952 to the present), which will help medicinal chemists further develop novel routes for their synthesis. 1. conclusions This study demonstrates signicant progress made over the past 70 years in the eld of total ALA synthesis. Diverse routes and methods for synthesizing ALA have been described in the literature, including racemic synthesis, chemical and enzymatic resolution synthesis, asymmetric chiral pool synthesis, asymmetric chiral auxiliary synthesis, enzyme-catalyzed asymmetric synthesis, chemical-catalyzed asymmetric synthesis. While these methods generally focus on basic scientic research, few of them have proposed synthetic pathways for industrial production. For example, continuous-ow chemistry, enzyme engineering, and other new technologies could have broadly applications in the total synthesis of ALA to achieve efficient, economical, and energy-saving industrial production. The ability to combine new technologies advances numerous possibilities for creating cheaper and higher quality products to fulll the needs of the population. The development of these new technologies will undoubtedly benet future applications. Furthermore, new technologies and strategies will be implemented in the synthesis of ALA to provide ideas and insights for scientic researchers and peers, associated with these realms and aspects in the long run.