Propolis, a natural resin created by bees, has garnered significant attention from both the scientific community and industry due to an impressive range of bioactivities. Nonetheless, the intrinsic variability in its chemical composition and bioactive profiles has been hindering propolis’ full potential use. We previously showed that ethanol extracts (EEs) of a Portuguese propolis sample (Gerês) collected over four consecutive years displayed similar chemical and biological profiles, a constancy never documented before. However, the characteristics of the unprocessed samples of Gerês propolis were never described. Hence, the central objective of this study is to assess the quality parameters of unprocessed propolis samples collected from Gerês (G), over a four-year period (2019–2022), alongside the analysis of the chemical composition and bioactivities of the EEs prepared with the same raw samples. The ash, wax, balsam and water contents of the unprocessed samples—G19 to G22—showed minor fluctuations, likely attributed to uncontrollable natural events impacting the propolis source and collection process. On the other hand, the antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of all the four ethanol extracts (G19.EE–G22.EE) consistently align with prior studies. Furthermore, the Gerês propolis extracts showed remarkable uniformity in chemical composition parameters too, particularly concerning total polyphenol, flavonoid and ortho-diphenol contents. In summary, our research reinforces the beneficial properties of propolis and show that extracts’ bioactivities remain within the reference ranges for Gerês propolis, despite minor differences in unprocessed samples, suggesting a consistent action over time. Thus, this work could be instrumental towards the establishment of standard parameters for propolis applications, offering valuable insights to this field of propolis research. 1. conclusions The ash, water, wax and balsam contents of all studied propolis samples met the quality requirements described in the literature for Portuguese/European propolis and stated by the Technical Regulation of Propolis Identity and Quality (Brazilian entity) for the control of propolis quality, although showing slight variations among them. The preliminary chemical characterization of the ethanol extracts prepared from such propolis raw samples confirmed their abundance in phenolic compounds and indicated their high quality. The extracts G21.EE and G22.EE exhibited the highest total flavonoid content, and G21.EE also showed the highest TOC content among the samples evaluated. Nonetheless, these differences do not appear to exert a significant impact on the bioactivities of the respective samples. Instead, there is a notable constancy and similarity in the biological activities among the tested propolis samples from Gerês, namely when comparing them with samples harvested from 2011. The antioxidant capacity of all the G.EEs was confirmed by both the DPPH• and ABTS• radical scavenging assays. Despite noticeable variations
among the extracts, these results align with previously published data, reinforcing the consistent antioxidant activity of Gerês propolis. Antimicrobial and antifungal properties of the evaluated G.EEs are consistent with those reported in the literature for most propolis samples, namely, the high susceptibility of Gram-positive bacteria and a less pronounced anti-yeast activity, similar to the activity of G.EEs previously studied by our group, further confirming the reliability of Gerês propolis. Yet, the particularly high activity against bacteria of the genus Bacillus seems to be a distinctive feature of propolis from Gerês and could be used as an indicator of the similarity of samples. In summary, our study provides evidence of the consistent behavior of Gerês propolis across different samples and years, a consistency that is prominently evident even at the unprocessed level. Moreover, the values obtained for all the tested G.EEs surpass those reported for other types of propolis worldwide. 