 However, this does not imply that the same result will be obtained when the reference frame is set in a (moving) molecule. As an example, two molecules avoiding an antiparallel orientation of the –NO2 groups would result in the missing of one of the six possible angles between molecules when regarded from the molecular moving frame. With regards to Fig. 11 this is not the case, the six possible relative orientations can be seen, no matter the distance between molecules. No ring correlation between molecules is thus detected and, therefore, when regarding the molecule as a whole, there are no patches of fast and slow-moving molecules. It must be pointed out that given the definition of the angle between molecules, the six orientations are seen as four spots in the plot because the scalar product is constrained between 1 and 1 (angles of 601 and 601 between two vectors result in the same scalar product). We have performed the same procedure with the angle between dipoles ydip expecting to see the same result as for the ring orientation, i.e. four spots in the angle–distance PDF plot. However, as can be seen in Fig. 11b there are two clear maxima for dipole orientations at cos(ydip) = 1. This result is in clear contradiction to that of the ring vector. The only explanation for this fact is that the dipoles of the molecule, mainly governed by the nitro group, tend to be parallel or antiparallel thanks to the high flexibility of the –NO2 group. To understand this result is crucial to point out that the dipole is not coplanar with the ring (see Fig. 2): it has a component perpendicular to it. Therefore, the observed parallelantiparallel conformation is well explained by the combination of the libration of the nitrogen atom, and the rotation of the two oxygen atoms. Finally, as shown in Fig. 11, the dipole has a continuum of relative orientations, contrary to what happens with the ring orientations. This, again, has to be understood taking into account that dipole direction is a convolution of the ring orientation and the movement of the high flexible –NO2 group that tends to orient the dipole parallel or antiparallel with the neighbouring molecules. We have concluded (from the structural analysis) that there is a correlation between dipoles. This fact, however, seems not to agree with the previous result shown in Fig. 9, i.e. there are
no regions with fast and slow-moving molecules. Orientational correlation between molecules could cause a molecule to rotate faster or slower depending on the relative orientation of its neighbours. Therefore, it is imperative to assess whether this correlation exists only between particular pairs of molecules or the correlation creates regions where all molecules have the dipole parallel or antiparallel. In other words, whether the correlation is homogeneous throughout the structure or heterogeneous. For this reason, we have calculated how many of the first six neighboring molecules surrounding a central one have a given relative orientation. We have calculated this for all possible orientations dividing cos(ydip) in regions of D[cos(ydip)] = 0.2 (symbols in Fig. 12). We show in the figure only two cases as follows: where molecules are parallel 1 o cos(ydip) o 0.8 and when the orientation is antiparallel 0.8 o cos(ydip) o 1. Similar results (not shown) are obtained for all orientations. We have also calculated the results coming from a completely random distribution of possible orientations (lines in the same figure). There are no differences between our simulation and a random distribution as seen in Fig. 12. We thus conclude that although there is a dipole correlation, there are no patches of molecules with a given relative orientation, and thus the homogeneous scenario is undoubtedly favored also from the point of view of the local structural ordering. 3. conclusions The goal of our work was to find the microscopic mechanism behind the dynamics of PCNB molecules in their plastic phase, as obtained by dielectric spectroscopy.14
We have performed this study by the concurrent use of single crystal X-ray synchrotron diffraction and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. Fig. 11 Relative orientation of two neighbouring molecules as a function of the distance. Panel (a) shows this correlation taking into account the ring vector (r-8), and panel (b) taking into account the dipole (~m) (see vectors in Fig. 2). Fig. 12 Probability distribution function of the number of neighbours surrounding a central molecule with parallel dipole (cos(ydip) = 1) (black) or anti-parallel dipoles (cos(ydip) = 1) (red). See the text for details. Circles and squares represent the results obtained from MD simulations. Lines are obtained assuming a completely randomized system. This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023 Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 30553–30562 | 30561
Concerning the structure, our X-ray single crystal diffraction experiments of PCNB confirm the existence of statistical disorder previously reported10,11 for this plastic phase. Furthermore, we have presented new data for the anisotropic displacement parameters that agree with the high thermal flexibility of the molecules shown in the MD simulations. Concerning the dynamics, two relaxations were obtained in the aforementioned dielectric spectroscopy experiments. These were tentatively associated with in-plane and out-of-plane movements of the dipole.14 Our results indicate that the interpretation of the experimental results is not accurate. We identify the two relaxations to a fast attempt of the molecule to jump between ‘‘equilibrium’’ orientations, which is subdiffusive in nature, and a slower process associated with the jump between ‘‘equilibrium’’ positions that completely decorrelates the molecular orientation and that is diffusive in nature. Moreover, the high thermal flexibility of the –NO2 group obtained both by simulation and experiment explains the initial correlation decay of the dipole correlation obtained by MD simulations. We have also investigated if the two relaxations are better described by a homogeneous or by a heterogeneous scenario, both from the point of view of molecular movements and the local structure. We clearly obtain that the homogeneous scenario is better for describing the plastic phase of PCNB: there are neither regions of fast (slow) moving molecules nor patches of molecules with a given orientation.