Essential oils (Eos) have demonstrated antiviral activity, but their toxicity can hinder their use as therapeutic agents. Recently, some essential oil components have been used within safe levels of acceptable daily intake limits without causing toxicity. The “ImmunoDefender,” a novel antiviral compound made from a well-known mixture of essential oils, is considered highly effective in treating SARS-CoV-2 infections. The components and doses were chosen based on existing information about their structure and toxicity. Blocking the main protease (Mpro) of SARS-CoV-2 with high affinity and capacity is critical for inhibiting the virus’s pathogenesis and transmission. In silico studies were conducted to examine the molecular interactions between the main essential oil components in “ImmunoDefender” and SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. The screening results showed that six key components of ImmunoDefender formed stable complexes with Mpro via its active catalytic site with binding energies ranging from −8.75 to −10.30 kcal/mol, respectively for Cinnamtannin B1, Cinnamtannin B2, Pavetannin C1, Syzyginin B, Procyanidin C1, and Tenuifolin. Furthermore, three essential oil bioactive inhibitors, Cinnamtannin B1, Cinnamtannin B2, and Pavetannin C, had significant ability to bind to the allosteric site of the main protease with binding energies of −11.12, −10.74, and −10.79 kcal/mol; these results suggest that these essential oil bioactive compounds may play a role in preventing the attachment of the translated polyprotein to Mpro, inhibiting the virus’s pathogenesis and transmission. These components also had drug-like characteristics similar to approved and effective drugs, suggesting that further pre-clinical and clinical studies are needed to confirm the generated in silico outcomes. 1. conclusions In conclusion, the development of next-generation antiviral drugs from natural products for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 should aim to have broad-spectrum activity against multiple variants, high potency, and low toxicity to minimize the risk of adverse side effects. These drugs should be administered through multiple routes for flexibility and convenience and have a distinct mechanism of action to avoid cross-resistance with existing drugs. Additionally, it would be beneficial if natural products used for these drugs could be easily and sustainably sourced to ensure a reliable supply. Indeed, our study highlights the potential of natural products in drug discovery for COVID-19 therapies. By screening phytoconstituents from well-established plant extracts, we identified the most potent bioactive molecules that bind to the Mpro protein of SARS-CoV-2. It is important to note that while our study identified Cinnamtannin B1, Cinnamtannin B2, Pavetannin C1, Syzyginin B, Procyanidin C1, and Tenuifolin as the most potent compounds, the therapeutic effect of the proposed EO mixture may not solely rely on these individual constituents. Essential oils contain complex mixtures of chemical compounds that may act synergistically with each other, enhancing their overall efficacy. Therefore, it is possible that the therapeutic effect of our proposed EO mixture may be attributed to the synergistic interactions between its various chemical constituents. Further studies are needed to fully elucidate the therapeutic potential of the proposed EO mixture for COVID19. Nonetheless, our study provides a promising starting point for the development of new and effective natural product-based therapies for COVID-19. Research Highlights
- ImmunoDefender is a novel formulated bioactive antiviral compound based on a well-established mixture of essential oils and is considered highly effective in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infections. - High affinity and capacity of blocking the main protease (Mpro) catalytic and allosteric sites are considered critical in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and virus transmission pathways. Molecules 2023, 28, 4296 14 of 17
- Identification of lead compounds was mainly focused on molecule linkage associations and the binding intensity demonstrated by the free binding energy scores. - The study followed a rigorous methodology to ensure the accuracy, safety, and efficacy of the antiviral herbal medicinal extract, including careful selection and dosing of essential oils based on their purity and potency and a consideration of toxicity data and previous studies. - The use of an inverse problem of mathematical expectation to determine the appropriate weighting for each compound based on their kinetic effects of temporarily irreversible inhibition of the key enzymes in the replication of the SARS-CoV-2 virus increased the reliability and validity of the study’s findings. - The predicted overall drug-likeness score chemical fingerprints for Cinnamtannin B1, Cinnamtannin B2, Pavetannin C1, Syzyginin B, and Tenuifolin showed very good agreement, with perfect approval for tolerability and efficacy.