Optical spectroscopic analysis of the chemical composition of milk in its natural state is complicated by a complex colloidal structure, represented by differently sized fat and protein particles. The classical techniques of molecular spectroscopy in the visible, near-, and mid-infrared ranges carry only bulk chemical information about a sample, which usually undergoes a destructive preparation stage. The combination of Raman spectroscopy with confocal microscopy provides a unique opportunity to obtain a vibrational spectrum at any single point of the sample volume. In this study, scanning confocal Raman microscopy was applied for the first time to investigate the chemical microstructure of milk using samples of various compositions. The obtained hyperspectral images of selected planes in milk samples are represented by three-dimensional data arrays. Chemometric data analysis, in particular the method of multivariate curve resolution, has been used to extract the chemical information from complex partially overlaid spectral responses. The results obtained show the spatial distribution of the main chemical components, i.e., fat, protein, and lactose, in the milk samples under study using intuitive graphical maps. The proposed experimental and data analysis method can be used in an advanced chemical analysis of natural milk and products on its basis. 1. conclusions. Effective use of spectral information for better interpretation results can be reached by the application of factor spaces and projection techniques provided by the arsenal of chemometrics. PCA is a common and natural tool for the exploratory analysis of multivariate data. PCA performs a decomposition of the spectral data, such as HSIs, into a linear combination of principal components. The PCs can then be investigated and interpreted one by one. As described in Section 3.4.1, the investigation of PCA results obtained for HSI can be performed using images of the scores carrying spatial information and line plots of the loadings (spectral information) for individual PCs. Figure 4 shows the scores and loadings for the first three PCs calculated from the HSI of Sample F1. The results obtained for Sample F4 are very similar and will not be shown. The loadings in this case are the variable weights: each wavelength contributes to a particular PC. The scores are data projections for individual PCs. The higher the absolute intensity of the variable in loadings (values along the wavenumber axis), the higher its contribution to the pixel intensities in the score image. Therefore, if a loading plot has a spectrum-like pattern that has specific spectral features of a particular component, the scores can be similarly interpreted as a concentration map of the respective component.  4. conclusions This feasibility study has shown that scanning confocal Raman microscopy is a powerful tool for the investigation of the chemical composition of natural milk without the need to destroy the colloidal structure of samples. The main components of milk responsible for its nutritional value can be clearly identified in the Raman spectra. The problem of signal overlap in the spectra can be overcome by mathematical spectral unmixing based on chemometric methods of curve resolution. This study has proved that the correct application of chemometrics can significantly increase the value of hyperspectral Raman imaging, particularly for dairy analysis. The ALS-MCR algorithm with non-negativity constraints has shown to be well suited for the analysis of individual components. HSIs can be deconvoluted into colored spectral maps indicating areas reach of fats, proteins, and lactose. Such representation facilitates qualitative microstructural analysis of various samples.