Polymer simulation with both accuracy and efficiency is a challenging task. Machine learning (ML) forcefields have been developed to achieve both the accuracy of ab initio methods and the efficiency of empirical force fields. However, existing ML force fields are usually limited to single-molecule settings, and their simulations are not robust enough. In this paper, we present PolyGET, a new framework for Polymer Forcefields with Generalizable Equivariant Transformers. PolyGET is designed to capture complex quantum interactions between atoms and generalize across various polymer families, using a deep learning model called Equivariant Transformers. We propose a new training paradigm that focuses exclusively on optimizing forces, which is different from existing methods that jointly optimize forces and energy. This simple force-centric objective function avoids competing objectives between energy and forces, thereby allowing for learning a unified forcefield ML model over different polymer families. We evaluated PolyGET on a largescale dataset of 24 distinct polymer types and demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in force accuracy and robust MD simulations. Furthermore, PolyGET can simulate large polymers with high fidelity to the reference ab initio DFT method while being able to generalize to unseen polymers. 1 ar X iv :2 30 9. 00 58 5v 1 [ cs .L G ] 1 S ep 2 02 3 1 conclusion We introduce PolyGET, a novel polymer forcefields learning framework with Generalizable Equivariant Transformers. Focusing on force optimization exclusively, our training paradigm enables accurate molecular dynamics simulations and generalization across polymer families and unseen polymers. Our multi-molecule approach fosters robust, transferable knowledge of interatomic interactions, contrasting with existing forcefields that jointly optimize potential energy and forces. Our results on large polymer simulation datasets demonstrate PolyGET’s accuracy, robustness, and speed, showcasing its potential for material science and industry applications.