Due to the risk of heavy metal pollution in infant milk powder, it is significant to establish effective detection methods. Here, a screen-printed electrode (SPE) was modified with nanoporous carbon (NPC) to detect Pb(II) and Cd(II) in infant milk powder using an electrochemical method. Using NPC as a functional nanolayer facilitated the electrochemical detection of Pb(II) and Cd(II) due to its efficient mass transport and large adsorption capacity. Linear responses were obtained for Pb (II) and Cd(II) in the range from 1 to 60 μg L−1 and 5 to 70 μg L−1, respectively. The limit of detection was 0.1 μg L−1 for Pb(II) and 1.67 μg L−1 for Cd(II). The reproducibility, stability, and anti-interference performance of the prepared sensor were tested as well. The heavy metal ion detection performance in the extracted infant milk powder shows that the developed SPE/NPC possesses the ability to detect Pb(II) and Cd(II) in milk powder. 1. conclusions In this study, a SPE/NPC was developed as a transducer for the electrochemical detection of HMIs (Pb(II) and Cd(II)). The use of a SPE provides a portable, disposable, and efficient platform for the electrochemical determination. Notably, the unique merits of the graphite carbon phase and porous structures of NPC effectively promote the mass transfer on the sensing surface. Its surface morphology exhibits a porous structure, which provides abundant active sites for the “in situ” electro-deposition of Bi(III) and the following reduction in HMIs. Under optimal conditions, the SPE/NPC sensor offered a linear response ranging from 1 to 60 µg L−1 and 5 to 70 µg L−1, and satisfactory LOD of 0.1 µg L−1 and 1.67 µg L−1 for Pb(II) and Cd(II), respectively. After a long-term operation, no obvious change in the stripping responses of the HMIs was observed. For the selectivity evaluation, acceptable changes in the peak current compared with the responses of Pb(II) and Cd(II) were observed after the addition of interferences. The average recovery ratio of 115.32% for Pb(II) and 86.78% for Cd(II) was realized in the real application in infant milk powder. Given the excellent electrochemical performance and simple fabrication process, the SPE/NPC developed in our work provides a promising method for the detection of HMIs in milk powder samples.