Targeted synthesis of C/composite Ni-based material was carried out by the method of matrix isolation. The composite was formed with regard to the features of the reaction of catalytic decomposition of methane. The morphology and physicochemical properties of these materials have been characterized using a number of methods: elemental analysis, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy, temperature programmed reduction (TPR-H2), specific surface areas (SSA), thermogravimetric analysis, and differential scanning calorimetry (TGA/DSC). It was shown by FTIR spectroscopy that nickel ions are immobilized on the polymer molecule of polyvinyl alcohol, and during heat treatment, polycondensation sites are formed on the surface of the polymer molecule. By the method of Raman spectroscopy, it was shown that already at a temperature of 250 ◦C, a developed conjugation system with sp2-hybridized carbon atoms begins to form. The SSA method shows that the formation of the composite material resulted in a matrix with a developed specific surface area of 20 to 214 m2/g. The XRD method shows that nanoparticles are essentially characterized by Ni, NiO reflexes. The composite material was established by microscopy methods to be a layered structure with uniformly distributed nickel-containing particles 5–10 nm in size. The XPS method determined that metallic nickel was present on the surface of the material. A high specific activity was found in the process of catalytic decomposition of methane—from 0.9 to 1.4 gH2/gcat/h, XCH4, from 33 to 45% at a reaction temperature of 750 ◦C without the stage of catalyst preliminary activation. During the reaction, the formation of multi-walled carbon nanotubes occurs. 1. conclusions Thus, in this work, a new C/composite material based on nickel and polyvinyl alcohol was synthesized and characterized, which was prepared by the organic matrix method. The composite synthesis was carried out with the directed formation of nanosized metallic nickel particles and the formation of a metallic nickel phase during the composite synthesis. The described approach made it possible to form nanosized metallic particles immobilized in a C-containing matrix with a narrow distribution of 5–15 nm. At the same time, some of the nickel-containing particles were partially encapsulated. The choice of the phase composition and size of the metallic component crystal was carried out with projection on the methane decomposition reaction. The use of the directed construction method of the catalytic system gave a pronounced catalytic effect: 1. Elimination of the first stage of the catalyst s reducing activation; 2. Sharp increase in the activity of the nickel-containing composite in terms of the sorp-
tion of reagents and the yield of the target product, hydrogen;
Figure 13. Carbon nanotubes (a,b) formed during methane decomposition. composite aterial base o nic l a l i l t ri , ic as re are y t e r ic trix ethod. t ir f t e for ation of a metal ic nickel phase during the composite synthesis. The described approach made it possible to form nanosized m tallic particles immobilized in a C-containing matrix with a narrow distribution of 5–15 nm. At the same time, some of the nickel-containing particles were partially encapsulated. Polymers 2023, 15, 2534 16 of 20
The choice of the phase composition and size of the metallic component crystal was carried out with projection on the methane decomposition reaction. The use of the directed construction method of the catalytic system gave a pronounced catalytic effect:
1. Elimination of the first stage of the catalyst’s reducing activation; 2. Sharp increase in the activity of the nickel-containing composite in terms of the sorption of reagents and the yield of the target product, hydrogen; 3. Further detailed study of the process of nanotube growth on the described composite
material is of interest. It is possible that the process of nanotube growth in this case will proceed along routes different from the growth of nanotubes by the mechanism of carbon diffusion [103]. The partial carbon encapsulation of nickel particles in the composite material provides evidence for this assumption. It is possible that surface carbon may serve as a precursor for the nucleation of a carbon nanotube, the growth of which may occur by incorporating carbon fragments specifically on this catalytic surface. The formation of metalcontaining composites with a narrow distribution of metallic particles is an extremely promising approach for synthesizing catalysts for structurally sensitive processes and processes with pronounced diffusion limitations.