Dichalcogenides (disulfides and diselenides), as reactants for organic transformations, are important and widely used because of their potential to react with nucleophiles, electrophilic reagents, and radical precursors. In recent years, in combination with photochemical technology, the application of dichalcogenides as stable radical reagents has opened up a new route to the synthesis of various sulfurand selenium-containing compounds. In this paper, synthetic strategies for disulfides and diselenides and their applications with photochemical technology are reviewed: (i) Cyclization of dichalcogenides with alkenes and alkynes; (ii) direct selenylation/sulfuration of C−H/C−C/C−N bonds; (iii) visible-light-enabled selenoand sulfur-bifunctionalization of alkenes/alkynes; and (iv) Direct construction of the C(sp)–S bond. In addition, the scopes, limitations, and mechanisms of some reactions are also described. 1. conclusions In this review, the recent progress in the synthesis and application of disulfide and diselenide as radical reagents with photochemical technology is reviewed, and the reaction scopes, limitations, and mechanisms of some of these reactions are also discussed. From the above discussion, it can be seen that the visible-light-promoted disulfide and diselenide radical reactions provide a stable and robust platform for the efficient construction of various selenium-/sulfur-containing heterocyclic compounds or bifunctional products. The successful examples described in this review convincingly demonstrate the high potential of disulfide and diselenide for drug discovery and applications. Among these synthesis methods, photochemistry and synergistic metal/photoredox catalysis techniques provide a more friendly and sustainable alternative for the application of disulfide and diselenide and illustrate the development prospects of thioether as free radicals. More catalytic means should be explored in the application of disulfide and diselenide as free radical reagents, especially in terms of electrochemical synthesis methods, because electrochemical
Molecules 2023, 28, 1998 32 of 35
strategies have become increasingly powerful tools for the synthesis of organic compounds in recent years. In addition, the harmful consequences of metal catalysts and peroxides used in the reaction process cannot be ignored. It is our hope that this paper will encourage more researchers to contribute to this emerging field by developing more environmentally friendly catalytic systems.