Pelargonium quercetorum is a medicinal plant traditionally used for treating intestinal worms. In the present study, the chemical composition and bio-pharmacological properties of P. quercetorum extracts were investigated. Enzyme inhibition and scavenging/reducing properties of water, methanol, and ethyl acetate extracts were assayed. The extracts were also studied in an ex vivo experimental model of colon inflammation, and in this context the gene expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) were assayed. Additionally, in colon cancer HCT116 cells, the gene expression of transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M (melastatin) member 8 (TRPM8), possibly involved in colon carcinogenesis, was conducted as well. The extracts showed a different qualitative and quantitative content of phytochemicals, with water and methanol extracts being richer in total phenols and flavonoids, among which are flavonol glycosides and hydroxycinnamic acids. This could explain, at least in part, the higher antioxidant effects shown by methanol and water extracts, compared with ethyl acetate extract. By contrast, the ethyl acetate was more effective as cytotoxic agent against colon cancer cells, and this could be related, albeit partially, to the content of thymol and to its putative ability to downregulate TRPM8 gene expression. Additionally, the ethyl acetate extract was effective in inhibiting the gene expression of COX-2 and TNFα in isolated colon tissue exposed to LPS. 1. conclusions The present study explored the composition and biological properties of extracts of different polarity from the aerial parts of P. quercetorum, a plant traditionally used by the local population in the Hakkari region of Turkey. The extracts showed a different qualitative and quantitative content of phytochemicals, with water and methanol extracts being richer in total phenols and flavonoids, especially rutin and hydroxycinnamic acids, namely caffeic acid and rosmarinic acid. This could explain, albeit partially, the higher antioxidant effects showed by methanol and water extracts, compared with ethyl acetate extract. By contrast, the ethyl acetate was more effective as cytotoxic agent against colon cancer cells, and this could be related, albeit partially, to the content of thymol and to its ability to downregulate the gene expression of TRPM8, an endovanilloid receptor possibly involved in colon carcinogenesis. Intriguingly, docking runs also suggest a high putative affinity of rutin towards TRPM8. This could suggest a potential involvement of rutin in mediating, albeit partially, the cytotoxic effects induced by the ethyl acetate extract of P. quercetorum, in human colon cancer HCT116 cells. Finally, the ethyl acetate extract reduced the gene expression of COX-2 and TNFα gene expression, in isolated colon specimens challenged with LPS; thus, supporting further in vitro and vivo studies for investigating protective effects against gut inflammatory diseases.