There is a recognized need for the development of cost-effective, stable, fast, and optimized novel materials for technological applications. Substantial research has been undertaken on the role of polymeric nanocomposites in sensing applications. However, the use of PANI-based nanocomposites in impedimetric and capacitive electrochemical sensors has yet to be understood. The present study aimed to explore the relationship between the sensitivity and linearity of electrochemical pH sensors and the composition of nanocomposites. Thin films of PANI/CeO2 and PANI/WO3 were deposited via spin coating for characterization and application during the electrochemical impedance and capacitance spectroscopy (EIS and ECS) transduction stages. The findings showed that the optimized performance of the devices was extended not only to the sensitivity but also to the linearity. An increase of 213% in the ECS sensitivity of the PANI/CeO2 compared to the metal oxide and an increase of 64% in the ECS linearity of the PANI/WO3 compared to the polymeric sensitivity were reported. This study identified the structure–property relationship of nanocomposite thin films of PANI with metal oxides for use in electrochemical sensors. The developed materials could be applied in devices to be used in different fields, such as food, environment, and biomedical monitoring. 1. conclusions The present study was designed to determine the effect of nanocomposites of PANI
with metal oxides on the response of electrochemical impedimetric and capacitive pH
sensors. The thin films were produced via spin coating on FTO substrates from an NMP
solution of the nanocomposites. The solutions were prepared by physically mixing the
hydrothermally synthesized metal oxides, CeO2 and WO3, and PANI. This study has
shown that the PANI/CeO2 and PANI/WO3 nanocomposites optimized the EIS- and ECS-
based pH sensors. The ECS sensitivity of the PANI/CeO2 sample represented an increase
of 213% compared to the metal oxide’s sensitivity, while for the EIS sensitivity, the in-
crease was 20%. The linearity showed an increase of 46% compared to the PANI’s linearity
based on the ECS method and 31% based on the EIS method. For the PANI/WO3 sample,
the increase in the sensitivity of the EIS and ECS methods was 37% and 71%, respectively,
while the increase in the linearity was 31% and 64%, respectively. The results of this study
indicate that the nanocomposites improved not only the linearity of the PANI-based sen-
sor but also the sensitivity of the metal oxide-based sensor. These findings were supported
by the analysis of the roughness-to-thickness ratio, two morphological characteristics of
the thin films with an impact on the interfacial electron transfer rate and, consequently,
the sensors’ performance. Although there is a need for further studies to evaluate the structural characteristics
of the composites and their effect on sensing devices, the findings of this study contribute
to our understanding of PANI and PANI-based nanocomposites applied to impedimetric
and capacitive electrochemical sensors for ions. A key strength of the present study was
the evaluation of the capacitive properties of PANI-based materials applied in chemical
sensors following the novel findings of previous works.