This work presents the synthesis of a new representative of hemicurcuminoids with a nonyloxy substituent (HCur) as a fluorescent amphiphilic structural element of vesicular aggregates based on phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylserine (PS), and 10,12-pentacosadiynoic acid (PCDA). Both X-ray diffraction analysis of the single crystal and 1H NMR spectra of HCur in organic solvents indicate the predominance of the enol-tautomer of HCur. DFT calculations show the predominance of the enol tautomer HCur in supramolecular assemblies with PC, PS, and PCDA molecules. The results of the molecular modeling show that HCur molecules are surrounded by PC and PS with a rather weak exposure to water molecules, while an exposure of HCur molecules to water is enhanced under its supramolecular assembly with PCDA molecules. This is in good agreement with the higher loading of HCur into PC(PS) vesicles compared to PCDA vesicles converted into polydiacetylene (PDA) ones by photopolymerization. HCur molecules incorporated into HCur-PDA vesicles exhibit greater planarity distortion and hydration effect in comparison with HCur-PC(PS) ones. HCur-PDA is presented as a dual fluorescence-chromatic nanosensor responsive to a change in pH within 7.5–9.5, heavy metal ions and polylysine, and the concentration-dependent fluorescent response is more sensitive than the chromatic one. Thus, the fluorescent response of HCur-PDA allows for the distinguishing between Cd2+ and Pb2+ ions in the concentration range 0–0.01 mM, while the chromatic response allows for the selective sensing of Pb2+ over Cd2+ ions at their concentrations above 0.03 mM. 1. conclusions In summary, the newly synthesized representative of the hemicurcuminoid family bearing a nonyl substituent (HCur) forms the supramolecular assemblies with phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylserine and poly10,12-pentacosadiynoic acid (PCDA) molecules, which allows for the obtaining of mixed vesicular aggregates containing the fluorescent HCur through the thin film procedure. The HCur-PCDA vesicles were converted into the polymeric ones through photopolymerization. The phospholipid-based vesicles demonstrate the high loading by HCur molecules, while the loading extent is much less for the PDAbased vesicles. This correlates with molecular modeling simulations revealing the more favorable encapsulation of HCur molecules via their nonyl substituents into the phospholipidbased assemblies, while the PCDA-based assembly provides less efficient screening of HCur molecules from the exterior water molecules. The single-crystal XRD analysis revealed a high planarity of HCur molecules in the solid state, although the planarity distortion of HCur may have affected its spectral behavior in the mixed vesicles. The spectral behavior of HCur in the PDA-based aggregates differed from that in the phospholipid-based ones. In particular, the fluorescence of HCur in the PDA-based vesicles demonstrated much greater sensitivity to the external stimuli (temperature changing from 293 to 313 K and the pH increase from 7.5 to 9.5) than the fluorescence of HCur-PC(PS) vesicles. This highlights an impact of greater exposure of HCur to a bulk of solution on the sensitivity of its fluorescence to the external stimuli. It is also worth noting that HCur-PDA is introduced as the dual fluorescent-chromatic nanosensor. The difference in the sensitivity and selectivity of the fluorescent and chromatic responses of HCur-PDA indicates that they are driven by the substrate–HCur and substrate–PDA interactions correspondingly. Thus, the fluorescent response of HCur-PDA vesicles to both heavy metal ions (Pb2+ and Cd2+) and polylysine is more sensitive than the colorimetric response of the vesicles, although both responses interfere with each other. This highlights both the molecular structure of HCur and its supramolecular package into the different vesicular aggregates as the key factors responsible for the sensing ability towards the heavy metal ions and polylysine.