Black cumin seeds and seed oil have long been used in traditional foods and medicine in South Asian, Middle Eastern and Mediterranean countries and are valuable flavor ingredients. An important ingredient of black cumin is the small molecule thymoquinone (TQ), which manifests low toxicity and potential therapeutic activity against a wide number of diseases including diabetes, cancer and neurodegenerative disorders. In this study, the antioxidant activities of black seed oil, TQ and a related molecule found in black cumin, thymohydroquinone (THQ), were measured using a direct electrochemical method to experimentally evaluate their superoxide scavenging action. TQ and the black seed oil showed good superoxide scavenging ability, while THQ did not. Density Functional Theory (DFT) computational methods were applied to arrive at a chemical mechanism describing these results, and confirmed the experimental Rotating Ring Disk Electrode (RRDE) findings that superoxide oxidation to O2 by TQ is feasible, in contrast with THQ, which does not scavenge superoxide. Additionally, a thorough inquiry into the unusual cyclic voltammetry pattern exhibited by TQ was studied and was associated with formation of a 1:1 TQ-superoxide radical species, [TQ-O2]•. DFT calculations reveal this radical species to be involved in the π-π mechanism describing TQ reactivity with superoxide. The crystal structures of TQ and THQ were analyzed, and the experimental data reveal the presence of stacking intermolecular interactions that can be associated with formation of the radical species, [TQ-O2]•. All three of these methods were essential for us to arrive at a chemical mechanism that explains TQ antioxidant activity, that incorporates intermolecular features found in the crystal structure and which correlates with the measured superoxide scavenging activity. 1. conclusions The molecular mechanisms that underlie the therapeutic effects of TQ are not completely understood, and literature reports show that TQ likely interacts with a number of receptors. Its low toxicity and the fact that TQ as well as the oil and seeds from which it is isolated have been used for thousands of years, make studying its therapeutic capacity appealing [6]. In this work, we have measured the superoxide scavenging ability of cold-pressed black cumin oil and two of its ingredients, TQ and THQ. Our results show that the oil and TQ are strong scavengers of the superoxide radical, whereas THQ has no effect on the scavenging, despite the presence of two para-hydroxyl groups. Structural X-ray diffraction data support subsequent DFT calculations that show a path of energetically feasible molecular transformations which corroborate cyclovoltammetry experimental features, i.e., the scavenging of superoxide by TQ, and no scavenging by THQ. The suggested stoichiometric reactivity of TQ when reacting with superoxide involves 1) direct π-π attack, involving superoxide oxidation to produce O2 as a product, and 2) superoxide σ proton attack on a TQ O(carbonyl), which gets reduced to C-OH, and is not sensitive to further attack by superoxide. This theoretical assessment is confirmed using two cyclovoltammetry techniques, cyclic voltammetry and hydrodynamic voltammetry at an RRDE. Lastly, our work shows the efficacy of combining multidisciplinary approaches, including experimental X-ray crystallography and voltammetry as well as computational DFT methods, to provide understanding of the mechanism of action of small molecule antioxidants.