The endogenous factors that control the differentiation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are not yet fully understood. The purpose of this study was to find MDSC-specific biomolecules through comprehensive metabolomic and lipidomic profiling of MDSCs from tumorbearing mice and to discover potential therapeutic targets for MDSCs. Partial least squares discriminant analysis was performed on the metabolomic and lipidomic profiles. The results showed that inputs for the serine, glycine, and one-carbon pathway and putrescine are increased in bone marrow (BM) MDSC compared to normal BM cells. Splenic MDSC showed an increased phosphatidylcholine to phosphatidylethanolamine ratio and less de novo lipogenesis products, despite increased glucose concentration. Furthermore, tryptophan was found to be at the lowest concentration in splenic MDSC. In particular, it was found that the concentration of glucose in splenic MDSC was significantly increased, while that of glucose 6-phosphate was not changed. Among the proteins involved in glucose metabolism, GLUT1 was overexpressed during MDSC differentiation but decreased through the normal maturation process. In conclusion, high glucose concentration was found to be an MDSCspecific feature, and it was attributed to GLUT1 overexpression. These results will help to develop new therapeutic targets for MDSCs. 1. conclusions In this study, we conducted a comprehensive metabolomic and lipidomic analysis of MDSCs, identifying 25 metabolites and 50 lipids. It was confirmed that levels of various biomolecules change as cells differentiate from BM precursors to BM-MDSCs and SPLMDSCs. BM-MDSCs showed increased inputs for the SGOC pathway compared to normal BM, while SPL-MDSCs showed altered metabolomic and lipidomic profiles related to mitochondrial dysfunction. The glucose concentration in MDSCs was significantly enhanced as MDSCs differentiated, and the increase in glucose was due to increased GLUT1 levels, mediating the influx of glucose into cells.