Recent advancements in the study of the protein complex photosystem II have clarified the sequence of events leading to the formation of oxygen during the S3 → S4 → S0 transition, wherein the inorganic Mn4Ca(μ-O)6(OHx)4 cluster finishes photo-catalyzing the water splitting reaction (Greife et al., Nature 2023, 617, 623–628; Bhowmick et al., Nature 2023, 617, 629–636). During this final step, a tyrosine radical (TyrZ), stable for a couple of milliseconds, oxidizes a cluster-bound oxygen while the hydrogen bonding patterns of nearby waters shift a proton away. A treatment of this redox reaction within the context of accepted transition state theories predicts rate constants that are significantly higher than experimentally recovered values (1012 s−1 versus 103 s−1). In an effort to understand this disparity, temperature-dependent experiments have revealed large entropic contributions to the rates with only a moderate enthalpy of activation. We suggest that the entropic source may be related to the observed proton rearrangements, and further possible near isoenergetic variations in the nearby extended H-bonding network delaying the realization of an ‘ideal’ transition state. In the following, we explore this relation in the context of Eyring’s transition state theory and Marcus’ electron transfer theory and evaluate their compatibility with the experimental evidence. 1. conclusions Marcus and related theories on ET or CEPT reactions are powerful tools because they can predict rate constants based on a small number of clearly defined parameters, which are often experimentally accessible. The extended H-bonded protein–water network in PSII might be seen as a special case of the solvent environment that in Marcus theory is described involving a quadratic energy dependence with the outer-sphere reorganization energy being the (only) decisive parameter [9]. However, such an approximative treatment does
Inorganics 2023, 11, 389 8 of 10
not consider individual solvent molecules. Instead, Marcus theory assumes a homogeneous solvent environment which responds to charges at the redox factors by a linear dielectric response; the total energy of charge solvation is decisive for the contribution of the outersphere reorganization to the activation energy. In contrast to the considerations on the ET in PSII of the Results and Discussion section, in Marcus theory, there is no special conformation of the solvent environment foreseen that uniquely supports the ET step; it is the total electrostatic solvation energy that matters, realized by a multitude of conformations of the solvent environment. Therefore, the underlying approximations of Marcus theory render its applicability to redox reactions in a protein environment with multiple conformations of a specific, evolutionary optimized protein–water network problematic, inter alia because it cannot easily capture the entropic contributions to the free energy of activation discussed herein. Whether the predictive power of ET theory can be fruitfully used regarding the contribution of inner-sphere processes of contributing redox factors (in PSII and other redox proteins), remains to be answered. In conclusion, the common assumption (in ET theories) of nuclear movements in approximately quadratic potentials needs to be scrutinized for redox factors surrounded by a fluctuating protein-internal HBN. In summary, our considerations support the appropriateness of discussing the ratelimiting proton-coupled ET step in photosynthetic water oxidation in terms of Eyring’s TS theory.