The field of microbe–metal interactions has been gaining significant attention. While the direct impact of metal oxyanions on bacteria has been investigated, significantly less attention has been placed on the ability of certain microbes to ‘collect’ such metal ions via secreted proteins. Many bacteria possess low-weight molecules called siderophores, which collect Fe from the environment to be brought back to the cell. However, some appear to have additional roles, including binding other metals, termed ‘metallophores’. Microbes can remove/sequester these from their surroundings, but the breadth of those that can be removed is still unknown. Using the Chromeazurol S assay, we identified eight isolates, most belonging to the genus Pseudomonas, possessing siderophore activity, mainly from sites impacted by coal mine drainage, also possessing a metallophore activity toward the rare earth elements that does not appear to be related to ionic radii or previously reported EC50 concentrations for E. coli. We found the strength of metallophore activity towards these elements was as follows: Pr > Sc > Eu > Tm > Tb > Er > Yb > Ce > Lu > Sm > Ho > La > Nd > Dy > Gd > Y. This is the first study to investigate such activity and indicates bacteria may provide a means of removal/recovery of these critical elements. 1. conclusions In conclusion, investigations into the interaction of bacteria with REEs need to continue. As we are using an increased amount of these elements in everyday devices, such as solar panels, batteries, and electric cars, we are by default introducing them into the environment at increased levels. This leads to greater interactions with microbes, and without fully understanding their impact we may be causing long term issues of which we are unaware. Our work has shown that bacteria do in fact have methods of directly interacting with REEs that may be related to siderophore activity. This is the first study of its kind and the first to identify metallophores which interact with REEs. As discussed, the majority of our isolates were members of Pseudomonas, a genus known to possess siderophores and metallophores. While we have discovered metallophore activity, the actual properties of the compound responsible for this remain unknown and one can only speculate on how it may function. In addition, the true levels of toxicity of these elements have yet to be studied beyond E. coli. 