Cucurbitaceae comprises 800 species, the majority of which are known for their nutritive, economic, and health-promoting effects. This study aims at the metabolome profiling of cucumber (Cucumis sativus) and bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria) fruits in a comparative manner for the first time, considering that both species are reported to exhibit several in-common phytochemical classes and bioactivities. Nevertheless, bottle gourd is far less known and/or consumed than cucumber, which is famous worldwide. A multiplex approach, including HR-UPLC/MS/MS, GNPS networking, SPME, and GC/MS, was employed to profile primary and secondary metabolites in both species that could mediate for new health and nutritive aspects, in addition to their aroma profiling, which affects the consumers’ preferences. Spectroscopic datasets were analyzed using multivariate data analyses (PCA and OPLS) for assigning biomarkers that distinguish each fruit. Herein, 107 metabolites were annotated in cucumber and bottle gourd fruits via HR-UPLC/MS/MS analysis in both modes, aided by GNPS networking. Metabolites belong to amino acids, organic acids, cinnamates, alkaloids, flavonoids, pterocarpans, alkyl glycosides, sesquiterpenes, saponins, lignans, fatty acids/amides, and lysophospholipids, including several first-time reported metabolites and classes in Cucurbitaceae. Aroma profiling detected 93 volatiles presented at comparable levels in both species, from which it can be inferred that bottle gourds possess a consumer-pleasant aroma, although data analyses detected further enrichment of bottle gourd with ketones and esters versus aldehydes in cucumber. GC/MS analysis of silylated compounds detected 49 peaks in both species, including alcohols, amino acids, fatty acids/esters, nitrogenous compounds, organic acids, phenolic acids, steroids, and sugars, from which data analyses recognized that the bottle gourd was further enriched with fatty acids in contrast to higher sugar levels in cucumber. This study provides new possible attributes for both species in nutrition and health-care fields based on the newly detected metabolites, and further highlights the potential of the less famous fruit “bottle gourd”, recommending its propagation. 1. conclusions This study provided the first comparative metabolite profiling of cucumber and bottle gourd fruits via HR-UPLC/MS/MS based on GNPS-networking in both modes, allowing for annotation of 107 metabolites, i.e., amino acids (14), organic acids (6), phenolic/cinnamic acid derivatives (15), alkaloids (1), flavonoids (24), pterocarpans (3), alkyl glycosides (4), sesquiterpenes (5), saponins (5), lignans (3), fatty acids/amides (16), and lysophospholipids (8). Overall, both fruits share an abundance of amino acids, organic acids, flavones-C-glycosides, fatty acids and lysophospholipids in a comparable manner. However, triterpenoid saponins, alkaloids, flavones-C-glycosides acylated with ferulic or p-coumaric acids, alkyl glycosides, and pterocarpans were exclusively detected in cucumber, and the latter two classes were reported in this study for the first time to be present in Cucurbitaceae. On the other hand, bottle gourd was further distinguished by the presence of dimethoxylated flavonoids acylated with malonic or acetic acids, lignans, and conjugates
Foods 2023, 12, 771 22 of 25
of phenyl compounds with caffeic/ferulic acid-O-glycosides, all of which were reported for the first time in genus Lagenaria. Sesquiterpenes were more abundant in bottle gourd, except for cynaroside A, which was detected in both fruits for the first time. The herein-identified metabolites rationalized several of the reported pharmacological effects of both species and further promoted them for new in vitro and in vivo medicinal research. Aroma profiling via SPME-GC/MS analysis detected 93 volatiles at comparable levels in both species, responsible for the pleasant aroma of bottle gourd, despite its enrichment with ketones and esters. 49 Silylated primary metabolites were detected in both species via GC/MS analysis at comparable levels, of which bottle gourd was further enriched with fatty acids, and cucumber with sugars. 