Peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) are an important class of DNA/RNA mimics that can hybridize complementary chains of nucleic acids with high affinity and specificity. Because of this property and their metabolic stability, PNAs have broad potential applications in different fields. Consisting of a neutral polyamide backbone, PNAs are prepared following the method used for peptide synthesis. In this regard, they are prepared by the sequential coupling of the protected monomers on a solid support using a similar approach to solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS). However, PNA synthesis is a little more challenging due to issues of the difficulty on the preparation of monomers and their solubility. Furthermore, the PNA elongation is jeopardized by intra/inter chain aggregation and side reactions. These hurdles can be overcome using different protecting group strategies on the PNA monomer, which also dictate the approach followed to prepare the oligomers. Herein, the main synthetic strategies driven by the protecting group scheme are discussed. However, there is still ample scope for further enhancement of the overall process. 1. conclusions and perspectives PNAs have gained special interest over the last three decades as nucleic acid analogues. While their synthesis resembles the solid-phase synthesis strategies used to prepare peptides, the process is rather more tedious and greatly depends on the choice of a suitable orthogonal/compatible permanent/ temporary pair of protecting groups for the nucleobase and backbone, respectively. The suitability of different protecting groups on PNA not only makes the synthesis of this compound convenient but also could have an important impact into the development of PNA–peptide conjugates and PNA–DNA chimeras in SPS. The distinct strategies used to synthesize PNA have advantages and disadvantages. Thus, for example the use of Boc for the N-terminal AEG backbone is subjected to less side-reactions than when Fmoc is used. On the other hand, the use of Boc could require protecting groups for the nucleobases more difficult to be removed. Therefore, there is still considerable scope to explore other closely related options, as shown in Table 2. Regarding solid supports, the conventional polystyrene is the most used, although the use of PEG-based resins such as ChemMatrix and Tenta-Gel use to circumvent some of the synthetic problems associated with the interchain aggregation. Author contributions
All authors have contributed to the preparation of the manuscript and agreed with the final version. Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare. acknowledgements The work in the laboratory of the authors is being partially funded by the National Research Foundation of South Africa. 