The portions of the text mentioning future research directions are as follows:

1. "The relocation of countries is evident when comparing clusters in the period 2004 and 2019 and 2020. Several pairs of countries have always remained next to each other (in one cluster), i.e., (a) Italy and Luxembourg, (b) Finland and France, (c) Czech Republic and Slovakia, (d) Cyprus and Portugal, (e) Bulgaria and Latvia, and (d) Ireland and Spain. It was also noted that the cluster including Ireland and the southern European countries in 2004 represented the so-called “richer” region of Europe (higher living standards of the population), and the next two groupings represented the “poorer” region of Europe (lower living standards of the population)."

2. "Restrictions and lockdowns imposed during the pandemic changed household consumption patterns. The situation led to a reduction in the use of services, resulting in the reallocation of some “richer” European countries to the region of countries representing less favorable (in terms of living standards) consumption patterns. Dividing the 2004–2020 analysis period into two stages (2004–2019 and 2019–2020) in the study was justified, as the consumption pattern in the second stage was shaped by specific socioeconomic circumstances."

3. "In methodological terms, the following claims can be formulated. Ward’s clustering and k-means methods allowed to reduce a large number of countries to a few basic groups, which can be perceived as the subject and direction of further analysis. Comparing consumption structures in groups (clusters) rather than in individual countries reduced workload and shortened the time required to conduct the analysis. The method used in the research provided the possibility of comparing multivariate objects, as each country was described by variables relating to 12 categories of expenditure on consumer goods and services. Ward’s and k-means clustering methods can be used as a tool to help divide Europe into regions characterized by different consumption structures."

4. "In the conducted analysis, there was a number of unexpected “exceptions,” such as a high degree of similarity between the structure of expenditures of Poland and the Western countries in 2019 and Luxembourg and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe in 2020, as well as Ireland’s stable position among Southern European countries. Analysis of partial shifts in the positions of countries during the examined period offers further research potential."

These excerpts suggest areas for future