The portion of the text mentioning future research direction is:

"Our current research is among the first try to explore the relationship between corporate sustainable development performance, investor sentiment, and managerial overconfidence within the same framework. The limitation of this first try should be highlighted, and then the further investigation can be conducted to confirm or extend the findings. First, our sample is for one single country. Even though the selected country is widely considered as a representative for management or finance research within the Eastern Asian emerging economies, an international level sample or sample from other emerging economies or developed economies would allow for possibly more fruitful results and validate or expand the current results. Second, we do not have information on the micro-level detailed decision process within the management team, which would reflect how the external investor irrationality would drive the internal managerial irrationality with the force of corporate sustainable development performance. Other interview-based quantitative research or qualitative research may be incorporated to provide more insights. Third, the diversities existing in stakeholders of each company and the diversities across companies in different industries would naturally affect the actual level of social responsibility assumed by the companies, which may not be fully and correctly measured by some standardized CSR indexes. In addition, those non-measured yet observable CSR performance may induce investor sentiment and managerial overconfidence consequentially. An industry or company-based case study may help to complement the understanding of the relationship between corporate sustainable development performance, investor sentiment, and managerial overconfidence explored in the current study. At the same time, researchers may apply samples from other countries or even international level samples to validate or further explore our findings, which may help the corresponding countries or regions improve both corporate sustainable development and corporate governance."