"We take a rather different direction and focus on information asymmetry, and thus, does not require counterfactual removal of items as in EF1. Our epistemic approach is based on introducing copies of chores that bear no cost on the receiving agents (i.e. dubious chores) to eliminate envy. Formally, we propose a fairness notion called envy-freeness up to k dubious chores (DEF-k) defined as follows. Consider n agents and m chores and an allocation A = (A1, . . . ,An). Suppose there is a multiset D of k copies of the original m chores (called dubious chores) that can be assigned to agents, i.e. AD = (AD1 , . . . ,ADn ), such that they do not incur any additional cost on the receiving agent, but other agents perceive them as costly. In other words, each agent h only incurs the cost associated to the original allocation, i.e. vh(Ah)+vh(ADh ) = vh(Ah) while any other agent i ≠ h observes h’s valuation as vi(Ah)+vi(ADh ). If under this augmented allocation, every agent prefers its own allocation to the perceived allocations of others (i.e. vi(Ai) ≥ vi(Ah)+ vi(ADh ) for every pair of agents i, h), then we say that the allocation is envy-free up to k dubious chores (DEF-k). Intuitively, by introducing the k dubious chores, allocation A is made free of envy."

"In lieu of this computational hardness, we establish upper-bounds on the required number of dubious chores. While EF1 allocations of chores do exist and can be computed in polynomial time [Aziz et al., 2022a, Bhaskar et al., 2021], such allocations may require many dubious chores (n(n−1)) to become envyfree. This is because each pairwise envy relation between agents, the envied agent can dubiously receive the “worst” chore of the envious agent to remove envy. Example 3 demonstrates that this bound is in fact tight."

"In Section 5, we study the existence and computation of DEF-k along with Pareto optimality. Let us start by studying the decision problem of finding the optimal k for which a DEF-k allocation exists."

"In lieu of this computational hardness, we establish upper-bounds on the required number of dubious chores."

"All in all, our experiment shows that