"Amidst the uncertainty and challenges brought by the pandemic, it is essential to balance between promoting economic recovery and achieving sustainable energy and climate targets. To this end, the authors suggest several policy recommendations as follows: 7.1. green fiscal consolidation Many developing countries have indicated a plan for fiscal consolidation. However, as the climate clock is ticking, balancing a government’s plans to maintain fiscal sustainability while keeping progress toward the climate targets intact is essential. In doing so, the government may consider incorporating a green perspective with fiscal consolidation efforts. Firstly, governments can mobilize additional revenues from the fossil fuels sector using a carbon tax policy. In the short term, this policy can generate fiscal space to improve fiscal conditions post the pandemic. This policy also offers incentives for households and firms to make cleaner choices, which could reduce carbon emissions in the long run. Several studies also show that this policy can increase investment and production of RE [63]. Furthermore, additional fiscal revenues could be used to fund green public investment. This includes green energy, green transport, energy efficiency, and green R&D. These policy options are considered to have the possible benefit of stimulating the economy and facilitating energy transition [17]. Recycling the additional revenues toward green investment can provide double dividends: reducing carbon emissions and creating fiscal spaces [64]. As this policy has been implemented in more than 40 countries with various rates and mechanisms [65], the importance of this policy is becoming more critical than ever in the post-pandemic world. 7.2. green and sustainability bonds Given the limited fiscal budget, it is crucial to consider using the capital market to finance green recovery. Over the past years, the world saw an increasing trend of raising funds from private investors using green bonds. Amidst the global pandemic, the Climate Bonds Initiative (CBI) records that green, social, and sustainability (GSS) bond issuance at the worldwide level stood at USD 700 billion. This remarks a 95% increase compared to the previous year, reaching USD 358 billion [66]. While the trend is increasing, the potential is largely untapped, especially in emerging economies. In 2020, emerging economies only made up 16% of the total green bonds. This share is lower than the previous year, reaching 22% [66]. In the medium term, considering the conducive environment for GSS bond issuance in emerging economies, the figure is projected to reach USD 100 billion by 2023 [67]. Given the ample