"The main conclusions are as follows. First, the kernel density and Markov chain model are used to analyze the financing constraints and dynamic characteristics of corporate performance of logistics enterprises in China. The results show that the degree of financing constraints of logistics enterprises in China is decreasing from high to low. With the passage of time, the financing constraints of China logistics enterprises have been alleviated to a certain extent, and the spatial gap is not too obvious. And there is a 'Matthew effect' in which the rich are richer and the poor are poorer. However, the performance of China logistics enterprises has not been significantly improved, and there is no obvious spatial gap and polarization. And it is difficult for China logistics enterprises to achieve and maintain a high level of corporate performance. Second, financing constraints have obvious negative impacts on the performance growth of logistics enterprises. The development of the logistics industry requires the injection of social capital, and to solve the financing bottleneck of the logistics industry, it is necessary to alleviate the impact of financing constraints on the performance growth of logistics enterprises. Under the current economic situation, improving and developing a multi-level capital market is of great significance for promoting the high-quality development of logistics enterprises. Third, the impact of financing constraints on the performance growth of logistics enterprises in China has a double threshold inhibition effect on knowledge stock. With the increase of knowledge stock, there is a trend of first increasing and then decreasing. Similar characteristics exist in enterprises of different nature in China. Although logistics enterprises in different regions also have a double threshold of knowledge stock, the financing constraints in the central region have a restraining effect on the operating performance of logistics enterprises. With the increasing stock of knowledge, there is a growing trend."