The unique chemical reactivity of cysteine residues results in various posttranslational modifications (PTMs), which are implicated in regulating a range of fundamental biological processes. With the advent of chemical proteomics technology, thousands of cysteine PTM (CysPTM) sites have been identified from multiple species. A few CysPTM-based databases have been developed, but they mainly focus on data collection rather than various annotations and analytical integration. Here, we present a platform-dubbed CysModDB, integrated with the comprehensive CysPTM resources and analysis tools. CysModDB contains five parts: (1) 70 536 experimentally verified CysPTM sites with annotations of sample origin and enrichment techniques, (2) 21 654 modified proteins annotated with functional regions and structure information, (3) cross-references to external databases such as the protein–protein interactions database, (4) online computational tools for predicting CysPTM sites and (5) integrated analysis tools such as gene enrichment and investigation of sequence features. These parts are integrated using a customized graphic browser and a Basket. The browser uses graphs to represent the distribution of modified sites with different CysPTM types on protein sequences and mapping these sites to the protein structures and functional regions, which assists in exploring cross-talks between the modified sites and their potential effect on protein functions. The Basket connects proteins and CysPTM sites to the analysis tools. In summary, CysModDB is an integrated platform to facilitate the CysPTM research, freely accessible via https://cysmoddb.bioinfogo.org/. conclusions With the identification of numerous CysPTM types and their significant roles in life activities, it is necessary to establish a comprehensive platform integrated with CysPTM data resources and online analysis tools for the community. CysModDB is such a platform, containing 70 536 CysPTM sites on 21 654 proteins across 12 organisms and covering 12 PTM types. Extensive information from external databases and literature is included to annotate the CysPTM sites and related proteins. CysModDB includes a customized graphic browser to visualize the distribution of modified sites with different CysPTM types on protein sequences and mapping these sites to protein structures and functional regions, which assists in exploring cross-talks between the modified sites and the potential influence of the CysPTM sites on protein functions. Online analysis tools are integrated, including gene enrichment, regulatory network, investigation of sequence features and online computational classifiers for predicting CysPTM sites. Compared with the reported CysPTM databases (Table 1), CysModDB contains more PTM types, richer annotations and information visualization and more data formats for downloading. Specifically, it includes experimental identification
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
Figure 6. CysPTM features and cross-talks in the human proteome. (A) The sequence similarity of different CysPTM types. Each cell contains the Euclidean distance value between the PPM matrices of every two CysPTM types. (B) The cross-talks among the CysPTM types identified in the human proteome (cross-talk number < 10 is not shown), visualized using EVenn [56]. techniques and sample origin information, showing the PTM heterogeneity in different cell types and the target preference of different identification techniques. Moreover, a few analysis tools are included to assist in analyzing the modified sites or types, such as comparing the patterns between different PTM types. We compared the number of CysPTM sites between CysModDB and iCysMod [18] and found that the latter contained more than 10 000 sites. Most of these 10 000 PTM sites were annotated in iCysMod with human oxidation but derived from the mouse species in vivo [11] (private communications with Dr Zexian Liu, the senior author of the iCysMod article). Besides, some cysteine modification data collected by other databases are excluded in CysModDB due to annotation inaccuracy caused by technical limitations [21]. For instance, sodium arsenate was applied to detect s-sulfenylation, but it was later found to identify disulfides as well, and therefore, the modified sites recognized by sodium arsenate cannot be annotated with s-sulfenylation only [1, 50]. As most of the CysPTM types in CysModDB are identified from the human species, we examined sequence preferences around the modification sites of different CysPTM types in humans. The results are similar to the previous study in the iCysMod database [18] (data not shown). Furthermore, we investigated the differences between the CysPTM types by calculating the Euclidean distance between the PPMs of every two CysPTM types. A short distance indicates similar sequence features. Figure 6A shows that the distance between s-nitrosylation and s-glutathionylation is the shortest, followed by that between s-nitrosylation and ssulfenylation, suggesting that s-nitrosylation has similar features to s-glutathionylation and s-sulfenylation. Indeed, the numbers of cross-talks between s-nitrosylation and these two oxidation subtypes are noteworthy compared with the cross-talks between any other two types (Figure 6B), which is consistent with the previous study [18, 51]. Interestingly, the distance between snitrosylation and s-succination is relatively short, suggesting both share certain sequence features (Figure 6A). Figure 6A also shows that s-palmitoylation is far from any other CysPTM type, probably because s-palmitoylation requires catalysis by enzymes with unique features, whereas the rest modification types do not [2]. Different CysPTM types can competitively co-occupy at the identical position. Such co-occurrences include pairwise cross-talks between two different CysPTM types at the same position and multiple cross-talks with more than two CysPTM
types. We investigated the cross-talks from the human CysPTM sites in CysModDB (Figure 6B; Supplementary Table S3). There are 1987 sites involved in pairwise cross-talks and 1262 sites involved in multiple cross-talks (Supplementary Table S3). snitrosylation contributed to the most PTM sites and formed the most cross-talks to other oxidation types (e.g. 464 to ssulfenylation, 419 to s-glutathionylation, 273 to s-persulfidation), which might match the fact that s-nitrosylation is the initial state of many oxidation types [52]. Additionally, as the three CysPTM types (i.e. s-glutathionylation: 1748, s-palmitoylation: 1525 and s-persulfidation: 1660) have a similar number of PTM sites, we investigated their pairwise cross-talks. The number of cross-talks between s-glutathionylation and s-persulfidation was 353, double than those for the other two pairs (196 and 165). This observation suggests the high similarity of both oxidation types and the difference between them and s-palmitoylation. Key Points
• CysModDB is a comprehensive platform including 70 536 cysteine PTM sites with 12 different types, covering the
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
largest number of PTM types compared with previous databases. • CysModDB comprises several parts: PTM site and protein annotations, cross-reference to external resources, online computational tools for predicting CysPTM sites and integrated analysis tools. They are integrated by a customized graphic browser and a ‘Basket’. • CysModDB is user-friendly, in which the information is easily accessible, and data are downloadable in various file formats.