The D2 subunit dopamine receptor represents a key factor in modulating dopamine release. Moreover, the investigated radiopharmaceutical ligands used in positron emission tomography imaging techniques are known to bind D2 receptors, allowing for dopaminergic pathways quantification in the living human brain. Thus, the biophysical characterization of these radioligands is expected to provide additional insights into the interaction mechanisms between the vehicle molecules and their targets. Using molecular dynamics simulations and QM calculations, the present study aimed to investigate the potential positions in which the D2 dopamine receptor would most likely interact with the three distinctive synthetic 11C-labeled compounds (raclopride (3,5dichloro-N-[[(2S)-1-ethylpyrrolidin-2-yl]methyl]-2-hydroxy-6-methoxybenzamide)—RACL, FLB457 (5-bromo-N-[[(2S)-1-ethylpyrrolidin-2-yl]methyl]-2,3-dimethoxybenzamide)—FLB457 and SCH23390 (R(+)-7-Chloro-8-hydroxy-3-methyl-1-phenyl-2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-1H-3-benzazepine)—SCH)), as well as to estimate the binding affinities of the ligand-receptor complexes. A docking study was performed prior to multiple 50 ns molecular dynamics productions for the ligands situated at the top and bottom interacting pockets of the receptor. The most prominent motions for the RACL ligand were described by the high fluctuations of the peripheral aliphatic -CH3 groups and by its C-Cl aromatic ring groups. In good agreement with the experimental data, the D2 dopamine receptor-RACL complex showed the highest interacting patterns for ligands docked at the receptor’s top position. 1. conclusions Our docking results predicted that the FLB and RACL ligands tagged with 11C isotopes present higher binding affinities at the top part of the receptor. The absolute interaction energies at this level were 147.78 kJ/mol for RACL and 106.13 kJ/mol for the FLB ligand. The highest absolute interaction energy for the bottom part of the receptor was observed for the SCH ligand, while, for the top part of D2DR, the highest interaction patterns were observed for the RACL ligand. Additionally, from our predicted docked structures, the highest docking scores were seen for the RACL ligand at D2DR’s top position and the FLB ligand for the opposite docked pocket. While the FLB ligand manifests the tendency to emerge out of the receptor’s bottom pocket, the SCH and RACL ligands showed greater binding affinities for both receptor pockets while remaining inside of D2DR. As a consequence, the maximum solvent exposure area of 5.63 nm2 was observed for the FLB ligand docked at D2DR’s bottom position. The Rg profiles for all the ligands suggested a constant behavior in the ligand compactness levels, especially for the FLB and RACL ligands, which had the same gyration average values on both D2DR docked positions. For the SCH ligand, the Rg average value slightly decreased when the two opposite docked positions were considered. The
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 2005 14 of 16
highest atomic RMS deviations were observed for the FLB ligand situated at the top of the receptor. Likewise, the highest interatomic distances were correlated with the same ligand but considered at both D2DR positions. For both extremities of D2DR, all the ligands showed a similar angular distribution behavior. The most significant effects on the angle distributions were seen for the FLB and RACL ligands docked at the bottom part of D2DR, although the SCH ligand presented the largest angle value distributions, but without significant structural changes. The most prominent motions extracted from the PCA measurements for the RACL ligand docked at D2DR’s bottom position were triggered by the peripheral aliphatic -CH3 groups and by the -C-Cl aromatic ring groups. This type of motion led to a curved-twisted shape of the FLB and RACL ligands, which is in good agreement with their high atomic RMS fluctuations. Moreover, the QM calculations confirm this preferential top docked position of D2DR for all the ligands and identifies the RACL ligand presenting the highest complexation energy, with the SCH compound being the second most preferred ligand. Thus, according to our results, the RACL ligand docked at the top pocket of D2DR and the SCH ligand considered at the bottom part of the receptor are clearly the most efficient ligands for the modeled receptor–ligand interacting complex herein. 