The liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based metabolomics approach is a powerful technology for discovering novel biologically active molecules. In this study, we investigated the metabolic profiling of Orchidaceae species using LC-HRMS/MS data combined with chemometric methods and dereplication tools to discover antifungal compounds. We analyze twenty ethanolic plant extracts from Vanda and Cattleya (Orchidaceae) genera. Molecular networking and chemometric methods were used to discriminate ions that differentiate healthy and fungal-infected plant samples. Fifty-three metabolites were rapidly annotated through spectral library matching and in silico fragmentation tools. The metabolomic profiling showed a large production of polyphenols, including flavonoids, phenolic acids, chromones, stilbenoids, and tannins, which varied in relative abundance across species. Considering the presence and abundance of metabolites in both groups of samples, we can infer that these constituents are associated with biochemical responses to microbial attacks. In addition, we evaluated the metabolic dynamic through the synthesis of stilbenoids in fungal-infected plants. The tricin derivative flavonoidand the loliolide terpenoidfound only in healthy plant samples, are promising antifungal metabolites. LC-HRMS/MS, combined with stateof-the-art tools, proved to be a rapid and reliable technique for fingerprinting medicinal plants and discovering new hits and leads. 1. conclusions In this study, we presented the application of the integrated metabolomics approach and the state-of-the-art computational tools to provide acute insights regarding the characterization of phytochemicals of healthy and fungal-infected leaves from Vanda and Cattleya species. The data analysis pipelines of untargeted metabolomics analysis enabled the characterization of a considerable variation in compounds belonging primarily to the class of flavonoids, phenolic acids, chromones, stilbenoids, tannins, terpenoids, and steroids. Flavonoids were identified as the major compounds in both species independent of the physiological condition (healthy or fungal-infected). The flavonoids afrormosin, acacetin, and stilbenoids were found chiefly in fungal-infected plants, while nitrogen compounds were found predominantly in samples from healthy plants. The tricin derivative flavonoid, and the loliolide terpenoid were found only in healthy plants. From the dereplication and in silico fragmentation tools, 202 and 145 unique metabolites were detected in healthy, and fungal-infected Cattleya leaves. For the genus Vanda, 166 and 146 unique metabolites were detected in healthy and fungal-infected leaves. The integrated metabolomics approach and the combination of structural annotation, data mining, and chemometric tools could be applied as a reference dataset for MS/MS-based untargeted metabolomic analysis of
Molecules 2022, 27, 7937 13 of 15
species from the Orchidaceae.