Combined cisplatin–gemcitabine treatment causes rapid resistance development in patients with advanced urothelial carcinoma. The present study investigated the potential of the natural isothiocyanates (ITCs) allyl-isothiocyanate (AITC), butyl-isothiocyanate (BITC), and phenylethylisothiocyanate (PEITC) to suppress growth and proliferation of gemcitabineand cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer cells lines. Sensitive and gemcitabineand cisplatin-resistant RT112, T24, and TCCSUP cells were treated with the ITCs, and tumor cell growth, proliferation, and clone formation were evaluated. Apoptosis induction and cell cycle progression were investigated as well. The molecular mode of action was investigated by evaluating cell cycle-regulating proteins (cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and cyclins A and B) and the mechanistic target of the rapamycin (mTOR)-AKT signaling pathway. The ITCs significantly inhibited growth, proliferation and clone formation of all tumor cell lines (sensitive and resistant). Cells were arrested in the G2/M phase, independent of the type of resistance. Alterations of both the CDK–cyclin axis and the Akt–mTOR signaling pathway were observed in AITC-treated T24 cells with minor effects on apoptosis induction. In contrast, AITC de-activated Akt–mTOR signaling and induced apoptosis in RT112 cells, with only minor effects on CDK expression. It is concluded that AITC, BITC, and PEITC exert tumor-suppressive properties on cisplatinand gemcitabine-resistant bladder cancer cells, whereby the molecular action may differ among the cell lines. The integration of these ITCs into the gemcitabine-/cisplatin-based treatment regimen might optimize bladder cancer therapy. 1. conclusions Evidence has been provided that ITCs may diminish the risk of cancer development, recurrence and progression. The in vitro data presented here point to the distinct tumorsuppressive properties of AITC, BITC, and PEITC in terms of growth and proliferation blockade. Thus, the therapeutic integration of an AITC/BITC/PEITC cocktail into the current bladder cancer treatment should be considered as a hopeful strategy to enhance patient outcome. The results point to a different molecular action of the compounds. This may offer an advantage to synthetic drugs, since targeting several molecules may prevent rapid therapeutic resistance. 