Electrospun porous nanofibers have large specific surface areas and abundant active centers, which can effectively improve the properties of nanofibers. In the field of photocatalysis, electrospun porous nanofibers can increase the contact area of loaded photocatalytic particles with light, shorten the electron transfer path, and improve photocatalytic activity. In this paper, the main pore−forming mechanisms of electrospun porous nanofiber are summarized as breath figures, phase separation (vapor−induced phase separation, non−solvent−induced phase separation, and thermally induced phase separation) and post−processing (selective removal). Then, the application of electrospun porous nanofiber loading photocatalytic particles in the degradation of pollutants (such as organic, inorganic, and bacteria) in water is introduced, and its future development prospected. Although porous structures are beneficial in improving the photocatalytic performance of nanofibers, they reduce their mechanical properties. Therefore, strategies for improving the mechanical properties of electrospun porous nanofibers are also briefly discussed. 1. conclusions and perspectives In recent years, electrospinning has become a common method of preparing nanofibers with various structures due to its advantages of simple operation and controllability, and nanofibers with various structures can be prepared by changing the number of polymer fluids, the type of electrospinning head, and the working parameters. This paper reviews the formation mechanism of porous fiber membranes prepared by electrospinning: BF, VIPS, NIPS, TIPS, SR. The porous structure can increase the specific surface area of nanofibers and the area in contact with the light source while shortening the electron transport path and increasing the reaction activity, thus showing a wide range of application prospects in photocatalysis. From the perspective of the environment and the economy, loading photocatalytic particles on porous nanofibers can not only effectively remove organic pollutants, heavy metal ions, and harmful bacteria in water and reduce water pollution but also greatly avoid the loss of photocatalysts in recycling and save costs.