Initial screening of criminal evidence often involves serological testing of stains of unknown composition and/or origin discovered at a crime scene to determine the tissue of origin. This testing is presumptive but critical for contextualizing the scene. Here, we describe a microfluidic approach for body fluid profiling via fluorescent electrophoretic separation of a published mRNA panel that provides unparalleled specificity and sensitivity. This centrifugal microfluidic approach expedites and automates the electrophoresis process by allowing for simple, rotationally driven flow and polymer loading through a 5 cm separation channel; with each disc containing three identical domains, multisample analysis is possible with a single disc and multi-sample detection per disc. The centrifugal platform enables a series of sequential unit operations (metering, mixing, aliquoting, heating, storage) to execute automated electrophoretic separation. Results show on-disc fluorescent detection and sizing of amplicons to perform comparably with a commercial ‘gold standard’ benchtop instrument and permitted sensitive, empirical discrimination between five distinct body fluids in less than 10 min. Notably, our microfluidic platform represents a faster, simpler method for separation of a transcriptomic panel to be used for forensically relevant body fluid identification. 1. conclusions This research showed proof-of-concept microfluidic disc electrophoresis as part of a transcriptome-based method for forensic bfID. Given that forensic laboratories are overburdened, it was important to achieve this technique in a rapid system. To address this, the µEDisc was designed to accommodate three parallel domains to enable simultaneous analysis of three samples in approximately 10 min. Importantly, all mRNA markers for single-source samples of five body fluids, as well as mixed samples, were detected using the three primer panels. Optimization herein demonstrated that a 120 s injection of a 3 µL sample volume without heating the channel were the best conditions for separating the amplicons produced from genetic targets specific to various (5) body fluids. Using these conditions, all 11 genes from the three body fluid panels were detected consistently on the µEDisc. This is significant because it shows the microfluidic platform can detect all 11 genes in a fraction of the time consumed on commercial systems. Lastly, the sensitivity of the µEDisc system was tested with dilutions of the single-body fluid samples. While each of the body fluids had a
Micromachines 2022, 13, 1657 12 of 14
different sensitivity on the µEDisc system, the mRNA genes were consistently auto called in all of the dilutions, with the exception of the KLK2 gene. The resulting miniaturized total analysis system (µTAS) will permit complete, automated, direct-from-sample RNA-based body fluid identification amenable for use by nontechnical personnel. Overall, this research shows progress towards a new body fluid detection method that can rapidly and consistently identify any of the five forensically relevant body fluids.