Cardiac troponins (cTns) have long been the most valuable and specific biomarkers for detecting ischemic myocardial cells (MCs) injury, which is one of the key signs of myocardial infarction (MI). Modern methods (highly sensitive and ultra-sensitive immunoassays (hs-cTns)) of detection are an important and indispensable tool for the early diagnosis of MI and the choice of patient management protocols. Timely diagnosis of MI can significantly improve the prognosis of patients. However, in real clinical practice, doctors often face a significant problem when using cTns—the difficulty of differential diagnosis due to frequent and unexplained increases in the concentration of cTns in blood serum. In addition, there is conflicting information that may potentially affect the diagnostic capabilities and value of cTns: the influence of certain biological factors (diurnal rhythm, gender and age) on serum cTns levels; extra-cardiac expression of cTns; the possibilities of non-invasive diagnosis of MI; and other pathological conditions that cause non-ischemic injury to MCs. To solve these problems, it is necessary to concentrate on studying the metabolism of cTns. The review of our current knowledge about cTns metabolism consists of two parts. In this (first) part of the manuscript, the main stages of cTns metabolism are briefly described and the mechanisms of cTns release from MCs are considered in detail. 1. conclusions and future perspectives On the basis of this narrative review, I can conclude about the important role of cTns metabolism in the diagnosis of CVD including MI: differential diagnosis of CVD and several extracardiac diseases that cause an increase in cTn levels or affect the circulation and elimination of cTns from the bloodstream. It should also be noted that biological and analytical variations of cTns are clinically less relevant if concentrations are significantly elevated. However, this is a serious issue if cTn levels are moderately elevated, for example, in the early stages of MI and may complicate diagnosis.