Coffee is one of the world’s most popular beverages, and its consumption generates copious amounts of waste. The most relevant by-product of the coffee industry is the spent coffee grounds, with 6 million tons being produced worldwide per year. Although generally treated as waste, spent coffee grounds are a rich source of several bioactive compounds with applications in diverse industrial fields. The present work aimed at the analysis of spent coffee grounds from different geographical origins (Guatemala, Colombia, Brazil, Timor, and Ethiopia) for the identification of bioactive compounds with industrial interest. For this purpose, the identification and quantification of the bioactive compounds responsible for the antioxidant activity attributed to the spent coffee grounds were attempted using miniaturized solid-phase extraction (μ-SPEed), combined with ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography with photodiode array detection (UHPLC-PDA). After validation of the μ-SPEed/UHPLC-PDA method, this allowed us to conclude that caffeine and 5-caffeoylquinic acid (5-CQA) are the most abundant bioactive compounds in all samples studied. The total phenolic content (TPC) and antioxidant activity are highest in Brazilian samples. The results obtained show that spent coffee grounds are a rich source of bioactive compounds, supporting its bioprospection based on the circular economy concept closing the loop of the coffee value chain, toward the valorization of coffee by-products. 1. conclusions In this work, the bioactive and antioxidant potential of spent coffee grounds from different geographical origins (Guatemala, Colombia, Brazil, Timor, and Ethiopia) were determined through a µ-QuEChERS method coupled to spectrophotometric techniques (total phenolic content (TPC), and DPPH and ABTS scavenging assays). The highest value for the TPC was obtained for the sample from Brazil (53.7 ± 3.1 mg GAE/100 g DW), while Colombia presented the lowest value (41.6 ± 2.1 mg GAE/100 g DW). As for the DPPH assay, the highest scavenging activity was presented by Brazil (78.1 ± 7.3 mg TE/100 g DW) and the lowest for Guatemala (50.6 ± 5.3 mg TE/100 g DW). In addition, the extracts presented higher scavenging capacity against the DPPH radical, compared to the ABTS. The values obtained could be related to the fact that caffeic and chlorogenic acids, two bioactive compounds typically found in coffee, presented higher scavenging capacity against DPPH than ABTS. Finally, the identification of the bioactive compounds responsible for the antioxidant activity attributed to the spent coffee grounds was attempted using a sensitive and improved analytical method based on the µ-SPEed/UHPLC-PDA method. This method allowed the reduction of the amounts of sample and organic solvents, leading to an improved costeffective, and environmentally friendly microextraction strategy, which meets the Green Analytical Chemistry principles. Moreover, the little requirement for sample preparation enhances the detection and quantification of the analytes means that this method also reduces the time and cost of the analysis. A satisfactory figure of merit was achieved for selectivity, linearity, LOD, LOQ, trueness, and intra- and inter-day precision, which demonstrates the feasibility and practicability of the method for quantifying compounds in spent coffee grounds from different geographical origins. Seven bioactive compounds, namely 3-CQA, 5-CQA, caffeine, caffeic acid, 4,5-diCQA, 1,5-diCQA, and 3,4-diCQ, were identified and quantified. Caffeine and 5-CQA were the most abundant bioactive compounds found in all the samples, and their highest concentrations were found in the sample from Guatemala (385.3 ± 24.4 and 391.9 ± 27.3 mg/100 g DW, respectively). These bioactive compounds have been recognized in the literature for their impressive biological effect, hence why they present several possible applications in the pharmaceutical, cosmetic, and food industries, among others. The results obtained in this work provide insight into the chemical composition of spent coffee grounds, allowing the identification and quantification of the bioactive compounds that remain in the matrix. Moreover, it was possible to conclude that this
Molecules 2022, 27, 7504 16 of 19
coffee industry residue can be a rich source of numerous compounds with industrial interest.