Bioorthogonal catalysis mediated by transition metal catalysts (TMCs) presents a versatile tool for in situ generation of diagnostic and therapeutic agents. The use of ‘naked’ TMCs in complex media faces numerous obstacles arising from catalyst deactivation and poor water solubility. The integration of TMCs into engineered inorganic scaffolds provides ‘nanozymes’ with enhanced water solubility and stability, offering potential applications in biomedicine. However, the clinical translation of nanozymes remains challenging due to their side effects including the genotoxicity of heavy metal catalysts and unwanted tissue accumulation of the non-biodegradable nanomaterials used as scaffolds. We report here the creation of an all-natural catalytic “polyzyme”, comprised of gelatin–eugenol nanoemulsion engineered to encapsulate catalytically active hemin, a non-toxic iron porphyrin. These polyzymes penetrate biofilms and eradicate mature bacterial biofilms through bioorthogonal activation of a pro-antibiotic, providing a highly biocompatible platform for antimicrobial therapeutics. conclusions In summary, bioorthogonal polyzymes were generated using allnatural components: hemin as catalyst, encapsulated in a gelatin–eugenol nanoemulsion stabilized through riboavinmediated crosslinking. These nanoemulsions were stable in solution and readily biodegraded enzymatically by collagenase. The integration of the hemin catalyst into the nanoemulsion system enhanced the stability and water solubility of the catalyst while preserving its catalytic activity in solution and in the complex environment of biolms, as demonstrated through pro-uorophore activation. These polyzymes (Fe_PZ) were likewise promising therapeutic systems, effectively penetrating into biolms and uncaging pro-antibiotics in situ. Taken together, this bioorthogonal all-natural polyzyme platform provides on-demand drug ‘nanofactories’ for treating biolm-associated infections. More broadly, these studies present a strategy for maximizing therapeutic efficacy andminimizing side effects for a broad range of disease targets. data availability All supporting data is provided in the ESI.† author contributions A. Nabawy and R. Huang led the conceptualization, investigation and data analysis of the work and the writing of the original dra. D. C. Luther, X. Zhang, C. H. Li and J. M. Makabenta supported the investigation and data analysis of the work. V. M. Rotello helped the supervision of the work and led the review and editing of the dra. conflicts of interest There are no conicts to declare. 