Department of Biotechnology, Dr B. R. Am Jalandhar, Punjab-144011, India. E-mail: sa Department of Microbiology, University of C India Department of Biosciences and Bioengin Guwahati, Assam-781039, India Center for Innovation in Molecular and Pha Institute of Life Sciences, University of Hyd 500046, India. E-mail: sandipanchakraborty † Electronic supplementary informa https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ra03703c Cite this: RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 31004 1. conclusions Overexpression of the MCM7 gene responsible for cancer progression can be restricted with chemotherapy targeting to inhibit its action. The presented study utilized molecular docking and MD simulation to identify four compounds (vitamins) as potential drug candidates: ergocalciferol, ergosterol, cholecalciferol, and menaquinone, which can inhibit MCM7 activity. A detailed analysis has been performed to delineate the mechanism of action of the identied hits. Ergocalciferol binds with MCM7 with the highest affinity and the MCM7-ergocalciferol complex is stabilized by electrostatic interactions. The hydrogen bonding interactions are the most stable among all the four studied compounds, evident from the simulation. RMSD, Rg and SASA calculation shows that the binding of ergocalciferol induces structural alteration of the protein, MCM7. Cholecalciferol and ergosterol bind with MCM7 with comparable affinities. Both of them share a very similar moderately stable hydrogen bonding prole. Their interaction energy proles are also very similar. The binding of both the compounds induces structural uctuations in the MCM7, evident from the high RMSD values. RMSF indicates binding of these two compounds induces uctuations in several loop regions. However, the overall shape and size of the protein remain unaltered, evident from similar Rg and SASA proles of these two ligand-bound complexes and free protein obtained from MD simulation. Menaquinone, on the other hand, shows the least binding affinity among the identied hits which is accounted for its inability to form hydrogen bonds. Its binding is primarily contributed by van der Waals interactions. It forms several weak alkyl–alkyl interactions with the protein which are highly stable during the entire simulation timescale. Rg and SASA show that the binding of menaquinone to MCM7 altered the structural organization of the protein which leads to a change in functional motion of MCM7 (evident from the PCA analysis) which could lead to an altered MCM7 activity.