Ginseng (Panax ginseng) is a perennial herbaceous plant belonging to Panax genus of Araliaceae. Ginsenosides are a kind of important compounds in ginseng and minor ginsenosides are secondary metabolic derivatives of ginsenosides. Studies have shown that minor ginsenosides have many pharmacological effects, such as antioxidant, anti-tumor, anti-platelet aggregation, and neuroprotective effects. However, the therapeutic effects of minor ginsenosides are limited due to poor solubility in water, short halflife, and poor targeting accuracy. In recent years, to improve the application efficiency, the research on the nanocrystallization of minor ginsenosides have attracted extensive attention from researchers. This review focuses on the classification, preparation methods, pharmacological effects, and action mechanisms of minor ginsenoside nanoparticles, as well as existing problems and future direction of relevant research, which provides a reference for the in-depth research of minor ginsenoside nanoparticles. 2 preparation of minor ginsenoside nanoparticles  2.1 preparation of minor ginsenoside nanocrystals Nanocrystalline drugs do not have any matrix materials and can form a stable nano state only through the action of a small number of surfactants or polymers (Zheng and Song, 2012). Nanocrystalline drugs have the advantages of high solubility and dissolution, strong adhesion to biofilm, and low interference by food. There are mainly three types of nanocrystalline drug preparation technologies (Wang et al., 2014). 2.1.1 “top-bottom” technology “Top-bottom” technology is to crush large particles into nano-sized small particles (Dai et al., 2019), mainly including the medium grinding method, high-pressure homogenization method, and extrusion method. This technology has the advantages of low cost, large output, and simple operation (Shen et al., 2014). The disadvantage of “Top-bottom” technology is that reducing the particle size below 100 nm
requires much processing time and is not easy to expand production (Sinha et al., 2013). Xie et al. (2016) prepared minor ginsenoside Rg3 nanocrystals by high-pressure homogenization and precipitation. The minor ginsenoside Rg3 was dissolved in methanol as the organic phase, and poloxamer 188 was dissolved in purified water as the aqueous phase. The organic phase was added to the aqueous phase to prepare the crude suspension. The nanosuspension was obtained by circulating 4 times under the pressure of 28 MPa and 10 times under the pressure of 48 MPa through a high-pressure homogenizer. The suspension mixed with mannitol were prefrozen in an ultra-low temperature refrigerator, and then transferred into a freeze dryer for freeze-drying to obtain ginsenoside Rg3 nano freeze-dried powder. The prepared nanocrystals had a small particle size of (284 ± 14) nm, an ideal polydispersity coefficient of 0.156 ± 0.007 and good overall stability. It was measured that Rg3 contained in each gram of nano freeze-dried powder was 36.70 mg. 2.1.2 “top-bottom” and “bottom-top” combined technology The combined technology of “Top-bottom” and “Bottomtop” which to dissolve the drug in solvent and add the medicine solution to nonsolvent to precipitate it (Gao et al., 2012) takes one method as the pretreatment step, and then another method is used to prepare nano-drug crystals (Wang et al., 2014). This technology can make up for the shortcomings and make full use of the advantages of the two technologies. Wang et al. (2018) combined high-pressure homogenization technology with spray drying technology to prepare expandable particles to load with minor ginsenoside Rg3. Rg3 coarse powder was dispersed in aqueous solution. The dispersion was first treated by a high speed homogenizer at 15000 rpm for 2 min, and then it was processed through a high-pressure homogenizer that the cycle operation was carried out under different pressures. The prepared nanosuspension had a particle size of 400–500 nm, with the polydispersity coefficient less than 0.3. 2.1.3 other preparation technology of minor ginsenoside nanocrystals Aerosol solvent extraction system (ASES) means that supercritical fluid CO2 and solution are pumped into a previously installed precipitation reactor through a nozzle, in which the solute is oversaturated and precipitated into nanoparticles through the extraction and absorption of CO2 to the solvent and the diffusion of solvent molecules to CO2 (Yu et al., 2006). Tao et al. (2018) synthesized minor ginsenoside Rh2 and re-drug nanocomposites using ASES technology. The author chose vapor-over-liquid, subcritical liquid and supercritical liquid to prepare. In contrast, as the operating pressure and temperature increased to subcritical conditions, the particle size decreased: the average particle size was 164 nm. And the aggregation behavior was significantly improved. The
Frontiers in Pharmacology frontiersin.org02
zeta potential was −4.79 mV, and it had an excellent dissolution rate of 96.2%. 2.2 preparation of minor ginsenoside nano-drug carrier Nano-drug carrier has the advantages of improving the bioavailability, the pharmacokinetics of traditional chemotherapy drugs, and the accuracy of drugs reaching tumor cells. Nano-drug carrier also reduces the toxicity of drugs and prolongs the action time of drugs in vivo. At present, nano-drug carrier technology has been applied to the administration of minor ginsenosides. The commonly used preparation methods of minor ginsenoside nano-drug carrier include film hydration, emulsion solvent evaporation, desolvation and self-assembly. 2.2.1 film hydration method Film hydration usually refers to dissolving the carrier material and drug in an appropriate organic solvent, removing the solvent by rotary evaporation, forming a film between the drug and the film-forming material, and then hydrating the film to prepare nanoparticles. Yang et al. (2016) dissolved CK, phospholipids and D-α-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate in ethanol by ultrasound. Subsequently, the evaporation solution was evaporated by rotary vacuum evaporation until the film was formed on the vessel wall. The film removed residual ethanol, rehydrated to form liposomes loaded with CK followed by lyophilization (GCKT-liposomes). The particle size was 119.3 ± 1.4 nm, the zeta potential was 1.9 ± 0.4 mV, and drug encapsulation efficiency was 98.4 ± 2.3%. 2.2.2 emulsion solvent evaporation method Emulsion solvent evaporation method refers to taking waterinsoluble organic solvents (usually dichloromethane and chloroform) as the “oil phase”, in which the carrier material is dissolved, and take acetone or methanol as the “aqueous phase” to dissolve the drug into the influent phase, then make the two phases mix evenly (Qiu et al., 2004). After sufficient emulsification, the organic solvent is removed by rotary evaporation to obtain nanoparticles. Youwen Zhang et al. (2017) added Rg3 dissolved in ethanol to polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) dissolved in dichloromethane as the oil phase, and added it to the water phase formed by mixing polyvinyl alcohol and ethanol. The mixture was emulsified by a probe sonicator, and then subjected to magnetic stirring, washing, ultracentrifugation and freeze-drying to obtain nano freezedried powder. The average size of nanoparticles was 97.5 nm. Drug encapsulation efficiency was 97.5%, and the drug loading rate was 70.2%. The zeta potential was -28 mV. 2.2.3 desolvation method Desolvation is commonly used in the preparation of albumin nanoparticles. This method dissolves albumin in water as the aqueous phase, and drugs are generally dissolved in absolute ethanol as the organic phase (Li et al., 2021b). The two phases are mixed evenly by magnetic stirring, and the mixed solution is treated by dialysis or centrifugal purification and other methods to remove organic solvents, then the solution is freeze-dried to obtain nanoparticles. Singh et al. (2017a) embedded minor ginsenoside CK in bovine serum albumin (BSA) by desolvation method to form BSA-CK nanoparticles. That is, BSA was dissolved in water and sonicated, then magnetic stirring. Then CK dissolved in ethanol was added to the BSAwater solution and stirring was continued. The mixture was then dialyzed against excess methanol/distilled water using a dialysis membrane for 1 day and against distilled water for 2 days. Finally, BSA-CK nanoparticles was obtained by lyophilization. The average particle size of BSA-CK nanoparticles is about 157.2 nm, and the zeta potential was −70.80 mV. Compared with non-nano CK, the solubility of BSA-CK were significantly enhanced. 2.2.4 preparation method based on selfassembly The chemical components of minor ginsenosides are complex and diverse. After decoction and dissolution, it is easy to use the electrostatic interaction between opposite charges, hydrogen bonding, and acid-base complexation to aggregate into self-assembled nanoparticles (Ma et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021). Usually, the relevant drug ingredients are placed directly in water or buffer solution and stirred by heating to form self-assembled nanoparticles. Zhao et al. (2016) made that etoposide and ginsenoside Rh2 were covalently linked to both ends of polyethylene glycol (PEG) at the same time to form an amphiphilic polymer with hydrophobic ends and hydrophilic middle. The final yield of the target product was 62.9%. The particle size of nanoparticles was (112.64 ± 4.28) nm, the polydispersity index was (0.224 ± 0.002), and the surface potential was (-13.82 ± 2.74) mV. 3 pharmacological effects and mechanism of nano minor ginsenoside  3.1 pharmacological effects and mechanism of minor ginsenoside nanocrystals  3.1.1 anticancer effect and related mechanism Tao et al. (2018) prepared Rh2 nanoparticles using ASES technology. The cytotoxicity of Rh2 nanoparticles to cancer cell
Frontiers in Pharmacology frontiersin.org03
SCC-15 wasmeasured by theMTT assay. The results showed that Rh2 nanoparticles had good anticancer activity, and the anticancer ability was more effective with the decrease in particle size. This may be through endocytosis, which promotes the uptake of nano drugs by cancer cells and further leads to apoptosis. At the same time, X-ray diffraction showed that there were very few crystalline substances and no valuable diffraction peaks, indicating that Rh2 nanoparticles showed an amorphous shape after being treated by the ASES process. This situation may be due to the rapid precipitation in the process of ASES, which makes the drug form a metastable region, and then reduces the crystallinity of the drug. This transformation from crystalline state to amorphous state may reduce the water insolubility of drugs, improve the dissolution efficiency, and then improve the bioavailability. This may also be the reason for improved anticancer activity. (Figure 1). 3.1.2 antitumor activity of minor ginsenoside nanocrystals Xie et al. (2016) prepared ginsenoside Rg3 nanocrystals and evaluated the antitumor effect of Rg3 nanocrystal suspension in vitro by the MTT method. Compared with commercial Shenyi capsule, the results showed that the two drugs had strong inhibitory effects on HepG2 cells and A549 cells. And when the drug concentration was greater than 50 μg/ml, nano-drugs showed better inhibition of tumor cell proliferation than Shenyi capsules. This result shows that Rg3 nanocrystals have good antitumor activity. 3.2 pharmacological effects and mechanism of minor ginsenoside nanocarrier drug delivery system According to different carrier materials, nano-drug carriers can be classified into organic nanocarriers, inorganic nanocarriers and composite nanocarriers (Zhou, 2020). The
pharmacological effects of minor ginsenosides were significantly enhanced by the conclusion and prospects Minor ginsenosides have attracted the attention of researchers due to their various pharmacological activities. However, because of poor water solubility and stability, the efficacy cannot be well guaranteed, which limits the clinical application. Nanocrystallization of minor ginsenosides can well solve this problem. At present, relevant researchers have explored and practiced in the preparation methods, pharmacological effects and mechanism of minor ginsenosides nanocrystallization, which provides a reference for the clinical application of minor ginsenoside nanoparticles. Compared with nanocarriers, nanocrystals have the advantages of high drug load, simple preparation methods
and not restricted by carrier materials. The preparation difficulty of nanocrystals is closely related to the choice of preparation methods and physicochemical properties of drugs. However, it is still difficult to shorten the preparation time and improve the stability of nanocrystals. The key factors affecting the preparation of nanocrystals and the content of targeted drug delivery need to be further studied. Compared with nanocrystals, nanocarriers can achieve targeted release and protect drugs from early release before reaching the endpoint. But there are also some shortcomings. In the preparation process, the research and development of nanocarrier technology requirements are high, and the preparation process is complex. The process is greatly affected by equipment, operating conditions, raw materials and process parameters. The subtle changes in the manufacturing process can cause large changes in the final product quality, resulting in high uncertainty and poor reproducibility in production. The tissue specificity of the targeted drug is not high, and most experiments are conducted in vitro, and intracorporeal environment is not easy to be detected. So the development of core technology of nano medicine needs to be further broken. In summary, some achievements have been made in the research of minor ginsenoside nanoparticles.
