The portion of the text that mentions future research directions is:

"The sample chamber for experiments using liquid jets presented here supports different types of pump–probe experiments to be performed in the same experimental configuration in a quasi-simultaneous manner. However, the experimental conditions still need to be carefully adjusted in order to have optimum conditions for each measurement. WAXS signals are very sensitive to the liquid jet flow quality, which depend on many factors particular to each system under investigation: sample concentration, solvent viscosity, among others. Thus, pump–probe WAXS experiments at FXE are frequently realized at a reduced repetition rate compared with XES, while often attenuating the X-rays to prevent strong disturbances and ensuring a laminar liquid jet flow and detector linearity. On the other hand, XES experiments profit from an increased number of pulses at a higher repetition rate, in particular when detecting weak transient signals (e.g. low sample concentration, valence-to-core XES). Moreover, they are less affected by disturbances in the liquid jet flow caused by either laser or X-ray pulses. In the following, we show examples of pump–probe XES and WAXS experiments performed using the chamber described in this work. The experimental conditions for each experiment were optimized to obtain the best signal-to-noise ratio. As an example of the ultrafast pump–probe XES capabilities of FXE, we show in Fig. 7 the transient K and K XES of a 45 mM aqueous solution of [Fe(terpy)2] 2+ (terpy = 2,2 0 :6 0,2 00-terpyridine) upon 400 nm excitation. As a typical spin crossover model compound, [Fe(terpy)2] 2+ undergoes a low-spin to high-spin transition after ultrafast photoexcitation of a metal-to-ligand charge transfer state, which is readily captured by characteristic K and K XES spectral changes (Vankó et al., 2013, 2015; March et al., 2017). The ultrafast pump–probe XES measurements shown here were performed using a similar configuration reported previously (Khakhulin et al., 2020). Namely, the solution was flown by a 100 mmdiameter commercial Rayleigh jet (AdMiSys) at about 60 m s 1 and optically pumped with 400 nm, 50 fs pulses from