Purpose. The purpose of this research is to test the psychometric properties and factorial structure of the Addiction-like Eating Behaviors Scale (AEBS) in an Italian sample of adults with severe obesity seeking treatment for weight reduction and the general population, and to examine the measurement invariance of the tool by comparing a clinical and a nonclinical sample. Methods. A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was initially conducted to test the factorial structure of the Italian version of the AEBS (AEBS-IT) on a total of 953 participants. Following this, the measurement invariance and psychometric properties of the tool AEBS-IT were assessed on both inpatients with severe obesity (n = 502) and individuals from the general population (n = 451). Reliability and convergent validity analysis were also run. Results. CFA revealed a bi-factor structure for the AEBSIT, which also showed good reliability and positive correlations with food addiction (through the mYFAS2.0 symptom count), binge-eating symptoms, compulsive eating behavior, and dysfunctional eating patterns and the individuals’ body mass index (BMI). Moreover, the tool was invariant across populations. Conclusion. This study provided evidence that the AEBS-IT is a valid and reliable measure of FA in both clinical and nonclinical samples. 1. conclusions Conceptualizing FA as a behavioral addiction—namely, ‘eating addiction’ (EA)—the AEBS-IT represents a psychometrically sound instrument able to measure the presence of addictive-like eating behavioral patterns in both clinical and nonclinical samples. Indeed, this tool demonstrated good validity and reliability in both patients with severe obesity and the community sample, and might be used by researchers and clinicians to assess FA [103]. Considering that the AEBS-IT—unlike the YFAS/YFAS2.0/mYFAS2.0—is not meant to be a diagnostic tool, its good sensitivity to clinical populations (i.e., a good capacity to detect people with FA) further supports its utilization. Additionally—besides being moderately correlated with the FA-substance-based model—it shows high associations with compulsive eating, BED, and dysfunctional eating patterns that are above those displayed by the mYFAS 2.0. This suggests that, despite the YFAS representing the most widely used measure of FA, the AEBS-IT nonetheless properly reflects the behavioral correlates of the EA phenomenon (i.e., compulsive overeating), its characteristics, and related psychiatric comorbidities. Moreover, the term “Eating Addiction” would be more appropriate for describing the behavioral phenomenon of continuous overeating of a variety of foods and avoiding the conflicting assumptions that certain food can lead to the development of a SUD. 