Nora Penzel , Rachele Sanfelici, Linda A. Antonucci, Linda T. Betz , Dominic Dwyer, Anne Ruef, Kang Ik K. Cho, Paul Cumming, Oliver Pogarell , Oliver Howes, Peter Falkai, Rachel Upthegrove, Stefan Borgwardt, Paolo Brambilla , Rebekka Lencer, Eva Meisenzahl, Frauke Schultze-Lutter , Marlene Rosen, Theresa Lichtenstein, Lana Kambeitz-Ilankovic, Stephan Ruhrmann , Raimo K. R. Salokangas, Christos Pantelis , Stephen J. Wood, Boris B. Quednow, Giulio Pergola, Alessandro Bertolino, Nikolaos Koutsouleris , Joseph Kambeitz 1✉ and the PRONIA Consortium* conclusion This is the first multimodal examination of prognostication of CCu in ROP patients, along with generalizability testing in CHR patients. We found that the best predictor was based solely on clinical variables, reliably showing a contribution of global functioning, especially lower highest lifetime functioning, specific patterns of substance use, urbanicity and a lack of coping strategies. METHODS Study design and population As part of the multisite ‘Personalized Prognostic Tools for Early Psychosis Management’ study (PRONIA [www.pronia.eu, German Clinical Trials Register identifier DRKS0000504237]) N= 80 patients of age 15–40 years with ROP and N= 73 CHR patients were included. A further N= 29 patients of age 18–40 years with ROP were recruited within the monocentric,
Published in partnership with the Schizophrenia International Research Society Schizophrenia (2022) 19
longitudinal cannabis-induced psychosis study (CIP)71. The ROP group included via PRONIA had experienced an affective or non-affective psychotic episode within the past 24 months that was present within the past three months prior to study entry. The ROP group included in CIP had a psychosis diagnosis originally associated with cannabis use that preceded the onset of psychotic symptoms by no more than two weeks in the last 24 months, as defined in the International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision, criteria for substance-induced psychosis72. CHR individuals needed to fulfil (1) the basic symptom criterion “Cognitive Disturbances” assessed by the Schizophrenia Proneness Instrument73; and/ or (2) a slightly adapted version of the ultra-high-risk criteria according to the Structured Interview for Psychosis-Risk Syndromes74. ROP patients included in CIP were recruited at the Department of Psychiatry of Ludwig-Maximilian-University in Munich, while both PRONIA samples were recruited at ten different European sites (see ref. 41). Diagnoses were based on internationally established criteria and given by trained clinical raters37,71. Current or past alcohol dependence and polysubstance dependence within the past six months were exclusion criteria (Supplementary 1 for general exclusion criteria). Further, ROP and CHR patients included via PRONIA had to be abstinent from cannabis in the four weeks prior to inclusion. We imposed an additional inclusion criterion, only admitting patients with lifetime cannabis use prior to baseline. All patients from PRONIA underwent baseline assessment between 2014 and 2019 and were followed for up to 36 months. The CIP recruitment took place from December 2016 until May 2019, and the follow-up period was nine months. The study protocols were largely harmonized (detailed assessments are listed in Supplementary Table 1). Prior to inclusion, all patients provided written, informed consent (either personally or through a legal guardian if below the age of 18). Studies were approved at their respective sites by the local research ethics committees. outcome target Substance use was assessed in a semi-structured interview at each visit71 (Supplementary Fig. 1). At the baseline interview, clinical raters asked the patient about his/her history of cannabis use and subsequently if he/she had used cannabis since the previous examination. We defined CCu as any cannabis consumption between baseline and nine month follow-up. Conversely, we labelled each patient who remained abstinent until at least nine months after baseline assessment as discontinued cannabis use (DCu). Definition of the predictors We trained three unimodal classifiers: (i) clinical, (ii) cognitive and (iii) sMRI (Supplementary Table 2 for the full list of variables). Predictors for the clinical domain were selected based on their prior association with cannabis use, consisting of: (1) substance use-related items56,71, (2) environmental risk-factors16, (3) clinical symptoms8,19,20, (4) global functioning75, (5) stress and coping strategies information76, (6) demographic data and (7) the BMI14. The cognitive predictor variables were selected from subscores of the cognitive domains of the MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery77, following the previous approaches41. The sMRI classifier was based on whole-brain GMV. A harmonized protocol for the acquisition of sMRI data was used at all sites37. For pre-processing, we used the open-source CAT12 toolbox (version r1155; http://dbm.neuro.unijena.de/cat12/), which is an extension of SPM12 running in MATLAB 2018a (Supplementary 2 and Supplementary Table 3 for details of sMRI acquisition and pre-processing). We employed group information guided–independent component analysis (GIG-ICA)78, which simultaneously takes into account the covariance between brain voxels and their similarity to reference components (RCs) of interest71,79. We chose nine RCs34 previously shown to be linked with schizophrenia34, which included several regions that have also been associated with cannabis use disorder, namely the prefrontal cortex, insula and cerebellum32 (Supplementary Fig. 2 for RCs). machine learning strategy We generated and tested our predictors on the total sample of ROP patients (N= 109). Next, we tested if our predictors would generalize to CHR patients (N= 73). Our machine learning pipeline was implemented in NeuroMiner version 1.1 (www.pronia.eu/neurominer) running in MATLAB R2019. To build the set of predictors, we strictly separated the training and test phases in repeated nested cross-validation (CV) with ten folds and five permutations both at the outer (CV2) and inner cycles (CV1). All features of
the (i) clinical and (ii) cognitive predictors were standardized based on the median, with imputation of missing values by Seven-Nearest Neighbour imputation, and pruning of non-informative features (zero-variance, infinity). Subsequently, all features were scaled from zero to one. To find a set of optimally predicting features, we employed a wrapper-based feature selection using linear support vector machines (SVM; LIBSVM 3.1280; http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm). Following a previous approach41, we trained the models on the CV1 training data and picked the best-performing models based on the average SVMs (BAC) at the CV1 training and testing data. More specifically, we performed a greedy sequential forward search81 across the range of the SVM C regularization parameters (2½ 42Z!þ4 41), adding one feature at a time until the top ten percent most predictive features were selected. For the (iii) sMRI-based predictor, we accounted for site-specific heterogeneity in two steps. First, we used the so-called g-theory mask37,41 to exclude all voxels showing only between-site but no inter-subject variation71,82. Second, we adjusted the remaining voxels for site effects using ComBat83,84, a harmonization method based on an empirical Bayesian approach, frequently used to remove non-biological variation related to differences between MRI scanners. To preserve the biological variation of interest (CCu), we used ComBat on a subsample of healthy individuals from PRONIA that was matched for age and sex between sites (Supplementary Fig. 3, and Supplementary Table 4 for age and sex distribution of matched healthy control sample, Supplementary Fig. 4, and Supplementary Table 5 for pre/post comparisons). This model was then applied independently to our discovery (ROP) and validation samples (CHR) (Supplementary Fig. 5, Supplementary Table 6). Finally, the thresholded and site-corrected sMRI images entered our machine learning pipeline. Strictly separating between CV1 and CV2, we first scaled total intracranial volume proportionally from each voxel. We then corrected for sex and age effects based on betas computed in our healthy control subsample and employed GIG-ICA to reduce feature dimensionality. Next, the components were scaled between zero and one. Again, we employed an SVM80 with optimization of the C-parameter within a range from 2½ 42Z!þ4 41. See Supplementary 3 for a detailed description of sMRI processing and Supplementary Fig. 2 for an overview of all steps. multimodal prediction models To combine our best-performing unimodal (i) clinical predictor with the other unimodal predictors we used a stacked generalization procedure37. Here, the CV1-test decision scores from unimodal predictors served as features within the same CV structure and were scaled from zero to one, with the imputation of any missing sMRI and cognitive data using SevenNearest Neighbour imputation. Again, we optimized the C-parameter within a range of 2½ 42Z!þ4 . We assessed the significance of all classifiers via permutation testing85,86 with 1000 permutations and α= 0.05. Further, we compared differences between all predictors’ performances in ROP using the nonparametric Quade-test87 at the omnibus level followed by post-hoc pairwise comparisons using the t-distribution88. Between the ROP and CHR groups we compared the performance of our best predictor (clinical) using the nonparametric and unpaired Wilcoxon rank-sum test, whereas in CHR we compared the best unimodal predictor (clinical) with the best multimodal (clinical-cognitive) predictor. Additionally, we assessed whether our clinical and sMRI-based unimodal predictions were biased by confounding effects such as age, site, sex or level of functioning (Supplementary 4). To assess whether the imbalanced group assignment of the clinical predictor in CHR patients was associated with differences in substance use severity between ROP and CHR groups, we compared the sensitivity and specificity of these models separately for subjects with and without cannabis use disorder (Supplementary 6). feature importance To understand which features were most reliably contributing to the prediction of CCu, we computed the CV ratio37,85. The significance of features for predictors that included wrapper-based feature selection (clinical and cognition) was calculated by sign-based consistency following previous approaches41 (Supplementary 5). Exploration: effect of continued cannabis use on long-term clinical outcome To explore the clinical relevance of CCu-prediction, we examined the impact of CCu on long-term clinical outcome employing linear-mixed
Schizophrenia (2022) 19 Published in partnership with the Schizophrenia International Research Society
effects models using the package ‘lmerTest’89 in R language for statistical computing, version 3.6.390 separately in ROP and CHR groups. Clinical outcomes, specifically the sum score of positive, negative and general symptoms from the PANSS91, the sum score of BDI-II48, current symptoms of the GAF-S46,47 and current functional disability of the GAF-F until 18 months follow-up entered the model as dependent variables. Following the approach in a previous study92 we tested the main fixed effects “group” (CCu vs. DCu), time since baseline, linear, quadratic and cubic trends and trend interactions with the outcome. Patients were modelled as a random effect. We assessed model complexity for both groups (ROP and CHR) and each outcome individually employing the parametric bootstrap method for the Likelihood Ratio Test (R package PBmoDCuomp93) with 200 iterations. We deleted missing data for each case per visit. data availability.