Virtual teams play a crucial role in today’s knowledge-based organisation for overcoming challenges in our dynamic world, especially in the current situation of the COVID-19 pandemic. Teams play a key role in today’s knowledge-based organization for overcoming challenges in our dynamic world. Drawing on social information processing theory, this study explores the effect of members’ humility and team environment within a leaderless team mainly based on virtual platforms. Their impacts on shared leadership, relationship conflict, and team and individual performance were investigated. Surveying 219 students forming 61 virtual leaderless teams, the findings showed that a high level of humility and a positive team environment can help to improve shared leadership within a team, which contributes to team performance. Moreover, both humility and team environment have a negative relationship with relationship conflict, which depressed both team and individual performance. The analysis also indicated that humility positively interacts with team environment on shared leadership. KeyWORDS Humility, Leaderless Team, Relationship Conflict, Shared Leadership, Team Environment, Virtual Team keywords  humility, leaderless team, relationship conflict, shared leadership, team environment, virtual team  1. conclusion Due to the impacts of COVID-19 pandemic, people are working from home as the virtual team members to collaborate in organisations. This research represents a theory-driven examination of expressed humility in virtual teams. Shared leadership in a virtual team with no formal leader can be our future working style. Past humility studies are mainly on physical team dynamics with a humble leader (e.g. Morris, Brotheridge, and Urbanski, 2005; Hackett and Wang, 2012). Driven by social information processing theory, our research collaborates the findings of past research and verify the relationship among humility, shared leadership, relationship conflict and performance within a virtual team without a formal leader. Our findings identify the connection between humility and shared leadership, which results in a high level of team performance and suggest how team environment and team members’ humility can reduce relationship conflict, which has negative impacts on both team and individual performance. In addition, we also find there is a synergy effect between the team environment and humility to shared leadership. With the impacts of COVID-19 situation, the findings from this study contribute to the understanding of the importance of leadership in virtual team cooperation as a ‘new normal’, and to achieve business excellence in organisations. acknowledgment This study was partially supported by matching grants under UGC’s Research Matching Grant Scheme (700005 & 700026). Our gratitude is extended to PolyU and BDIC at HSUHK, which supported the research. The authors would also like to thank the handling editor and reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions, which have improved the quality of this paper.