Introduction: This study aimed to explore the psychological adaptation process of renouncing fanship due to para-loveshock in the context of fandom culture. Methods: We adopted netnography to explore social media platforms used by fans in China (Weibo, WeChat, and Douban) as research fields for 3 years. Results: (1) The process of “breaking up with” or renouncing an idol can be divided into three phases: the resistance phase with acute stress, the negotiation phase with bargaining, and the recovery phase with attachment reconstruction. In the resistance phase, fans displayed acute stress responses due to loveshock in psychological, physical, and behavioral aspects. In the negotiation phase, fans faced four barriers to renouncement: cognitive dissonance, emotional attachment, behavioral dependence, and social threat. They bargained within the three types of cognitive framework before deciding to “leave” or “re-follow” their idol. In the recovery phase, fans adopted two types of strategies to promote recovery: healing the past and facing the future. Healing the past involved public outcry, sharing their breakup plans, cognitive reconstruction, and seeking closure to the fan role. Facing the future involved switching environments, seeking new interests, and inhibiting the re-intrusion of trauma cues. (2) Internal factors affecting the psychological adaptation process of renouncement include the level of initiative, attribution styles, experience, attachment status and core belief systems, and alternative lifestyles; external factors include social support, peer pressure from the fan community, life stressors, and types and impact of traumatic events. (3) Based on the two dimensions of orientation and commitment, fans were classified into four types: short-term rational, short-term passionate, bounded loyal, and unconditionally loyal, corresponding to non-traumatic, stressful, accumulated, and traumatic breakup processes, respectively. (4) The post-renouncement growth of fans mainly manifested in the development of mental modes, coping skills toward trauma, emotional adaptation experience, and behavior patterns. Implications: This investigation of the recovery process from para-loveshock after renouncement of fanship can provide theoretical and practical insights into the development of psychological resilience for fans, reduction of the psychological distress and negative outcomes, and public governance on social media platform and cyber pop culture industry.. conclusions and discussion  research findings In this study, we divided the process of renouncing fanship into three phases: the resistance phase with acute stress, the negotiation phase with bargaining, and the recovery phase of attachment reconstruction. In the resistance phase, fans experience acute stress in physiological, psychological, and behavioral respects. In the negotiation phase, fans face four barriers to get past breakup: cognitive dissonance, emotional attachment, behavioral dependence, social threat, and bargaining between three types of cognitive frameworks TABLE 3 Classification of fans and breakup style. Rational-oriented Emotional-oriented Low levels of commitment Short-term rational fans non-traumatic breakup Short-term passionate fans Stressful breakup High levels of commitment Bounded loyal fans accumulated breakup Unconditionally loyal fans traumatic breakup
Frontiers in Psychology 14 frontiersin.org
FIGURE 1 The integrated theoretical model of this study. (adherence to the preexisting mental modes, rationalization and integration of new information, and overturning the preexisting mental modes) to decide between leaving or returning. In the recovery phase, the stress response is reduced, and fans promote recovery through strategies of healing the past and facing the future. Healing the past mainly refers to public outcry, sharing breakup plans, cognitive reconstruction, and seeking closure to the online fan role. Facing the future includes switching the environment, shifting attention to new interests, and inhibiting the re-intrusion of trauma cues. The three phases of psychological adaptation may overlap, and the boundaries may be  blurred, indicating some individual differences; for example, fans may have already begun to adopt recovery strategies when bargaining. Overall, the resistance phase reflects the acute stress response due to disbelief/shock happening within the first several hours or days, which is obviously a downturn; the negotiation phase reflects hesitation, struggling, and strong effort to persuade themselves in the following days; and the recovery phase reflects the great effort they make to seek help for a gradual upturn, which may take weeks or even months. The internal factors that influence the psychological adaptation process include the level of initiative, attribution style, experience, attachment status and core belief systems, and alternative lifestyles. External factors include social support, peer pressure from the fan group, real-life
stress, and types and impact of traumatic events. According to the two dimensions of orientation and commitment, fans can be broadly classified into four types: short-term rational fans, short-term passionate fans, bounded loyal fans, and unconditionally loyal fans, respectively corresponding to non-traumatic breakup, stressful breakup, accumulated breakup, and traumatic breakup behaviors. The postrenouncement growth of fans mainly manifests as growth in mental modes toward trauma, trauma coping skills, emotional adaptation experience, and improved behavior patterns. According to our findings summarized above, we  built an integrated theoretical model as illustrated in Figure 1. discussion The phase delineation in this study drew from established theoretical models. According to the current data, we mainly referred to the five-stage and four-stage theories of grief, and general adaptation syndrome, simplifying our model into three phases (Kübler-Ross, 1973). The five-stage model of grief, including denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance, has been used to study the loss of a relationship, the death of an important person, and responses in a time of crisis (Bolden, 2007; Stephens et  al., 2021). The four-stage model includes
Frontiers in Psychology 15 frontiersin.org
numbness-disbelief, separation distress (yearning-angeranxiety), depression-mourning, and recovery (Jacobs, 1993). General adaptation syndrome is described as three stages: alarm reaction, resistance, and exhaustion (Selye, 1950). By comparing the denial, anger, alarm, and resistance stages, it was determined that “resistance” would serve better in reflecting the first stage of fan responses. This phase was followed by the “bargaining” and “negotiation” phase which is considered a common and inevitable step in many existing models. Finally, “recovery” was used to refer to the long progress that covers more than depression and acceptance after a final decision was made. Among the three phases, the recovery phase should occupy the longest period (up to weeks or months for some fans), while the first and second phases usually take several hours to a few days. Some stages in other models were already covered by our three phases: for example, alarm reactions, physiological complaints, seeking comfort, cognitive restructuring, rational attribution, emotional expression, and reinvestment. Overall, there are similarities and differences between our study’s model and previous ones. The similarities lie in the experiences of anxiety, tension, resistance, wavering, and then moving to self-adjustment and acceptance. The difference lies in the fact that romantic breakup and bereavement is a two-way intimacy rupture, while the intimacy in idolatry comes from parasocial interaction and community attachment. It is a one-way mimetic intimacy, an intimacy that is built in virtual space and imagination, which can exist only from the perspective of the fans. Renouncing fanship is more of a psychological withdrawal of attachment, while the idol is not involved in person, and the fan can take control of the one-way attachment, that is, one-way breakup or one-way “re-following.” Therefore, the psychological adaptation process of breakup with the idol is different from that with an intimate partner, or other loss of intimacy such as bereavement. Pre-trauma risk factors typically include gender, personality, and age. For example, individuals with high psychological capital are better able to cope with traumatic events and have access to higher social support and coping skills. Peri-trauma risk factors include the degree of traumatic exposure, subjective fear, and core belief challenges. Coping style, rumination, resilience, sense of control, social support, and gratitude were found to be post-trauma risk factors (Sayed et al., 2015). Although loveshock recovery is similar to trauma recovery, there are certain differences. This study suggests that fans are faced with four aspects of hindrances during breakup with the idol: cognitive dissonance, emotional attachment, behavioral dependencies, and social threats. Based on these obstacles, we summarized the common factors that influence fans’ post-breakup psychological adaptation, including several factors such as initiatives, attributional styles, experiences, alternative lifestyles, peer pressure, life stress, and types of traumatic events, in addition to the core beliefs and social support mentioned in previous studies. On this basis, this study also classified the fans and their breakup process into
four types, which extends the theory of idolatry and stress recovery. implications for practice Based on the findings of this study, we suggest the following to address the psychological adaptation process of fans’ paraloveshock due to renouncing an idol. First, fans should not only learn how to “love” the idol, but also how to break up with them, that is, to grasp the coping skills that enhance post-breakup recovery efficacy, accelerate the psychological adaptation process, reduce the negative impact from loveshock, and promote postrenouncement growth and psychological resilience. Fans can identify the categories and phases they belong to according to our research, and adopt corresponding strategies to relieve stress responses, including: (1) when encountering negative events as a fan, one should be allowed to express real feelings and talk openly to balance the perceived relative deprivation and injustice. The fans need to keep away from the emotional manipulation and admonishment of “fandom culture.” In this way, self-aggression and depression can be effectively reduced, and negative spillover effects from the fandom can be avoided; (2) Fans should perceive and accept the negative information in an objective way instead of refusing it without thinking so that the first and second phases can be  shortened. By changing non-adaptive cognition and attributional styles, fans can break the “divine” fantasy about idols and accept the “human” reality of them, stop the aggressive, exclusionary, and exploitative mindset of the “fandom culture,” and avoid falling into love addiction, smartphone addiction, and group polarization and groupthink on social media; (3) After deciding to quit, the fans should stick to the determination, go public with the renouncement, and seek a firm closure to the social identity of a fan, that is, stop fighting for the idol any more to avoid first and secondary trauma; (4) To facilitate the recovery phase, fans should disengage from the online environment, reform lifestyle and behavior patterns, reduce mobile phone and social media use, keep away from traumatic cues, improve offline social activities, and develop new pleasures and hobbies; (5) One should stay away from fellow fans and fan groups that have deviant behavioral tendencies and spread negative emotions, be alert to the compulsive and destructive atmosphere of the group, and protect personal privacy from cyber-violence. Second, from a social perspective, it is necessary to cope with the chaos of “fandom culture” by destigmatizing fan behavior in a broad sense and preventing more impulsive and deviant fan behaviors. The deeper the involvement of fan behavior, the heavier the negative events experienced, the more sensitive the individual fans are to negative environmental stimuli, and the more severe the psychological trauma they may suffer. Therefore, family members and friends should pay more attention to the psychological crises of deeply involved fans, demonstrate some understanding, and offer support to fans who show high levels of stress responses, instead of engaging in controlling or abusive
Frontiers in Psychology 16 frontiersin.org
treatment, thereby helping them complete trauma recovery and achieve post-breakup growth. limitations and suggestions for the future This study has several limitations. First, due to the numerous data that constantly emerged, it was impossible to collect and store all the relevant material from all fans in a community. Therefore, the conclusions may require further quantitative validation. Experiments with measurement of physiological indicators will be  another contributing approach to obtain objective data. Another limitation is that the researcher mainly focused on the fan community of a certain typical young pop idol. Although our data was not limited to that idol and we also focused on negative events that triggered extensive losses of fans from other idols, most of the semi-private data was obtained from the fan community of one single pop idol. However, we do not consider this to have significantly biased our results because the triangulation validation with multiple sources of data verified our conclusions in many fan communities. In the future, other fan communities can be  investigated to explore potential heterogeneity and advance our theoretical model. The third suggestion lies in the age cohort of fans. The current study mainly focused on fandom fans whose age range is mostly below 40 years old. However, due to the high prevalence and accessibility of smartphone and social media platform, the age range and number of fans is expanding fast in China. There might be a large number of middle-aged and elderly fans who are not deeply involved or active in online fan community and are deemed as passerby fan, passing likers, or occasional fans. Their star worship behavior should obtain equal attention. Although it was indicated that breakup shock may generate more crises for young, especially adolescent fans, it is proposed that the current conclusion can apply to deeply involved fans of all ages. The fourth limitation is that this study mainly emphasized on the individual level. Discussion on group level is not enough and requires further organization systematically. Thus, explanations related to the community should be  a significant theme to consider. Despite these limitations, this qualitative study has provided sufficient evidence to reveal how passionate fans renounce their idols and companions, identified the associated factors and the developing phases of such processes, categorized fans and their
breakup responses to explain individual differences, and highlighted the positive aspects of undergoing para-loveshock and the process of breakup. data availability statement The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.