Using a convenience sample of adolescents (N = 1609; 63.5% female; Mage = 16.54), this study explored whether EI predicted adolescent life satisfaction and whether friendship quality and optimism mediated this relationship during the COVID-19 pandemic. The structural equation modeling revealed that EI predicted adolescent life satisfaction, friendship quality, and optimism, friendship quality partially mediated the relationship between EI and life satisfaction, and optimism partially mediated the relationship between EI and friendship quality. These findings prove that psychological or educative approaches focused on EI could increase life satisfaction in adolescents during difficult times such as COVID-19, but EI may be linked with life satisfaction via friendship quality only. Training in optimism approaches and friendship quality enhancement programs could also effectively promote life satisfaction. conclusions of previous studies and expand the application context, even during the pandemic, trait EI could be a useful target, and improvement through EI training may help adolescents improve friendship quality, optimism, and life satisfaction. This also gives some implications to the education departments to consider establishing courses related to trait EI to help improve students' positive psychological feelings, well-being, and quality of life. limitations and future studies Regardless of the positive findings, some limitations should be considered when interpreting the results. First, as the use of self-assessment questionnaires and online assessments could have some effect on the reliability and validity of the assessments. For instance, it is widely observed that self-report attitudes or abilities generally correlate positively with one another (Podsakoff et al., 2012).  Second, a convenience sample from only two schools was used, which may have affected the representativeness. Third, as trait EI is widely observed to correlate strongly with more general personality traits (Gannon & Ranzijn, 2005; van der Linden et al., 2017, 2018), the potential influence of personality factors should be ruled out (Podsakoff et al., 2012). Fourth, it could be the case that greater friendship support helps foster greater self-perceptions of EI. Lastly, although measured at different points in time, both the independent, mediating and dependent variables in this study were measured only once, which limited the ability to unravel the developmental changes in adolescents’ positive outcomes over time. 1 3 conclusions Despite these limitations, this study advances knowledge on the relationships between EI and life satisfaction. As the EI was measured during the worst phase of the epidemic only one month after the national lockdown in China, and life satisfaction was measured at the end of the semester after students had returned to school, a distinct mechanism was found between these two positive psychological variables as it was found that EI predicted life satisfaction and also influenced life satisfaction by strengthening friendship quality.