conclusion Individuals with mental illness experience lower rates of employment, despite a desire to work (Nordt et al., 2012). The findings of the present study demonstrate that lower rates of employment among individuals experiencing mental illness was exacerbated due to the closure of Clubhouse employment programs. Despite this, it is important to note that Canadian Clubhouses rapidly adapted much of their programming and maintained a connection with their members to mitigate the negative effects of the pandemic on their members (Mutschler et al., 2021). While limitations exist, including the lack of data on hours worked and average income, the study provides insight into the employment rates of Canadian Clubhouse members during the pandemic. Despite the overall decrease in employment across the pandemic, members continued to work, demonstrating the resilience of Clubhouse members and the strength of Clubhouse employment programs in supporting members to develop the skills necessary to maintain stable employment. Implications of the present study suggest that Clubhouses and their employment partners must continue to adapt and find novel ways in which to provide employment opportunities for Clubhouse members. This may include remote employment positions to allow Clubhouses to continue their employment programs and provide new employment opportunities to members despite restrictions in the workplace. Remote employment is able to offer greater flexibility and their programming (Mutschler et al., 2021). They were able to successfully adapt a significant amount of their programming to be offered virtually and continue to support member’s well-being (Mutschler et al., 2021; Hinchey et al., 2021). Specifically, Clubhouses implemented various policies such as increasing communication and outreach with members throughout the pandemic, expanding their meal programs and delivering their programming virtually, through services such as Zoom and Facebook (Mutschler et al., 2021). Despite these adaptations, offering employment programs during the pandemic was found to be difficult, due to employment partner’s changing their policies of in-person work. Thus, there were fewer employment opportunities available to members during the pandemic, which may have contributed to the decline in supported employment rates. Interestingly, while rates of transitional and supported employment decreased, rates of independent employment increased. This increase in independent employment could have been due Clubhouses increasing virtual programming during the closure of their typical employment program. Anecdotal evidence from Clubhouse directors revealed that some Clubhouses provided virtual sessions on vocational skills such as building resumes and job applications leading members to seek out independent employment (C. Habal-Brosek, personal communication, January 3, 2022). Further, the skills that were previously developed through supported employment programs may have led members to seek out additional independent employment opportunities. This may explain why rates of independent employment remained consistent while transitional and supported employment decreased. Additionally, the rise in independent employment may have been due to the changing nature of the labor market, where there was an increase in remote employment over the course of the pandemic (Ameri & Kurtzberg, 2022; Lisa et al., 2021), which may have better fit the needs of some Clubhouse members due to its greater flexibility (Lisa et al., 2021). In light of previous findings where Cubhouse employment programs are able to increase member’s employment durations and earnings, as well as the greater quality of life (Gold et al., 2016; Schonebaum et al., 2012), Clubhouses may benefit from exploring ways in which they can assist members in obtaining employment during the pandemic, for example, through virtual opportunities. This is particularly relevant, given that Clubhouse members reported increased mental health symptoms during the pandemic (Mutschler et al., 2021) and employment outcomes have been shown to facilitate recovery outcomes such as increased self-esteem and reduced hospitalization and readmission rates (Gold et al., 2014, Burns et al., 2007).