conclusions for this correlation. Additionally, the satisfaction with the training program may not be a strong predictor of perceived competency. Although all students increased in knowledge and skill acquisition, the content and experiences delivered may not have been sufficient for students to have achieved the confidence to meet mastery level, particularly for those students who had previous limited experience with children with ASD and delivery of early intervention services. Finally, for those students who were trained in the 4th cohort, the completion of the small N study and “in person” clinical experiences were reduced because of the COVID pandemic possibly leading to a decreased perceived competency. The specialization track described may serve as a model for other school psychology training programs or subgroups of a cohort interested in specializing in delivering services for the population of young children with ASD. Below are recommendations based on lessons learned through the development and implementation of this program. recommendations  pursue collaboration with applied settings using a compatible service‑delivery model Collaboration is essential to the proper establishment and running of programs such as this and must occur from the very beginning (Sweizy et al., 2008; Gardner et al., 2022). There must be a compatibility between the university program’s training model and the training site’s service-delivery model. This compatibility and the reasonable proximity of the two programs were important factors that brought the collaborators together. The school psychology students were receiving training in applied behavior analysis, consultation, assessment, and single-case experimental design methodology as a part of their core curriculum, which fit well with the ABA services delivered in the clinic. Given the strong evidence supporting ABA services to the ASD population and the increasing prevalence of ABA services,
school psychology programs providing training in this area may find ready collaborators. ABA training may help school psychology students obtain some of the necessary practicum experiences necessary to qualify for the BCBA credential. Obtaining the BCBA credential can help school psychologists develop a specialization in the field and even find jobs. A Burning Glass Technologies (2015) report commissioned by the Behavior Analysis Certification Board found an increase in job postings from 146 to 425 for clinical, counseling, and school psychologists demanding behavior analyst skills. It also found that in lists of jobs requiring behavior analyst credentials between 2012 and 2014, the title of “school psychologist” was consistently in the top ten job titles (third in 2012, ninth in 2013, and fourth in 2014). But for school psychology trainees to benefit from this, a mutual commitment to a training model like this must be made. This commitment is at the core of collaboration and helps all parties to work through challenges and difficulties when they inevitably arise. Close collaboration must also continue on an ongoing basis to effectively coordinate training across sites, evaluate outcomes, and make necessary adjustments over time. Strong collaboration helps to assure continuity of the program over time when personnel changes, problems, and crises like a worldwide pandemic occur (Ortiz & Levine, 2021). develop a logic model to plan your program Logic models provide a simple visual representation of how a program or organization works to accomplish its goals while specifying intended outcomes. This tool provides accountability and allows programs to communicate how they are functioning and how well they are doing (W.W. Kellogg Foundation, 2004). Kekahio et al. (2014) provide a helpful description of the utility of logic models when they state, “Developing a logic model at the beginning of program planning gives you a framework for charting the links between your program’s resources, activities, and outputs and its intended outcomes. It enables you to evaluate your program once it begins. And it helps you communicate to your stakeholders what you want to accomplish, how you intend to reach your goals, and how you will track your progress” (p. 1). Expanding a professional psychology program’s training opportunity is a large undertaking and requires careful planning, including a vision for the purpose of the program, conceptualizing its interconnected features, coordination between different elements of the program, and a conceptualization of the potential impact of the program. The logic model served to frame activities as the program was organized and to help the personnel to stay on course as the program developed over time. Although logic models generally contain the same basic elements, the names for
1 3
those elements and their visual representation can vary from model to model, which gives programs flexibility in how they portray their project. The most important thing is the planning that goes into taking a general idea for a project and conceptualizing how all the pieces will be fit together as a coherent picture. As a partnership is being formed across sites, trainers should propose to collaboratively develop a logic model with their colleagues at the training site (see Kekahio et al., 2014 &W.W. Kellogg Foundation, 2004). This activity will frame the project for both parties and allow them to communicate to their constituents who may wonder whether the program adds value to the existing services. It will also help both parties evaluate whether the program is having its intended impact or whether it needs to be revised or terminated. provide supplemental on‑site training Much of the training that school psychology trainees are receiving should be useful to them in the community based EIBI clinic. In the current program, the core curriculum included courses in ABA, school-based consultation, academic and behavioral assessment, professional ethics, developmental psychopathology, single-case experimental designs, school mental health and behavioral interventions, and a school-based practicum, all of which met the requirements for both NASP and APA accreditation. But because of unique characteristics of the clinic setting, programs should plan to deliver supplemental training, preferably on-site and with professionals who are knowledgeable about the clinic program. supplemental assignments were given to engage the students at a deeper level Specifically, the students completed a literature review on a topic of their choice related to ASD and gave an oral presentation to program faculty and peers during their first year in the program. They completed a single-case experimental design study during their 2nd year concurrently with a universitybased class on single-case experimental designs. The faculty guided the students in development of the research project, supervision during data collection, and dissemination of the results. Examples of study topics were “Using Natural Environment Teaching (NET) to Improve the Generalization of Peer Directed Mands” and “Increasing Functional Play in the Presence of High Level Restricted and Repetitive Behaviors.”
Active learning involves didactic and supplemental assignments which augments students' training by providing greater depth and breadth to areas to which they have not been previously exposed, which has potential to increase their skills and expand the professional settings in which they are qualified to work (Fayombo & Campus, 2014). This
too is an area in which collaboration can be beneficial to the students. Program faculty may already be aware of areas where program training can be strengthened, and clinic personnel can identify areas of needed training based on their observations of the trainees in the clinic setting from a more impartial point of view. The clinic personnel may be able to deliver some of the training, as was the case in this project, or identify qualified individuals to provide such training. start early and provide a continuum of training experiences A significant feature of the program was that students spent 4 to 6 h a week as a part of their 13-h a week training commitment for 2 years at the same clinic, beginning with observations and increasing responsibilities as students gained more training, supervision, and experience. Continuity at the same site over 2 years meant that the students could work on a longer-term basis with the toddlers (watch their development and programming for a longer time frame) and the professional staff, which gave them a longer-term perspective than if they had been in the site for only a year. use the clinic training experience to expand competency assessments Following decades of discussion on identifying professional competencies in psychology, an influential special issue of Training and Education in Professional Psychology devoted to the topic sought to provide a coherent framework for conceptualizing, operationalizing, and assessing professional competencies in graduate training programs (Fouad et al., 2009; Kaslow et al., 2009; Price et al., 2017). The NASP and APA organizations both encourage and require ongoing competency assessment of students as a part of their accreditation requirements. Continuous, systematic evaluation of students at the clinic site can provide supplemental information about individual students’ growth along with data for formative evaluation of the program. An advantage of this approach is that assessments can be conducted by professionals outside of the program, bringing a much-needed external perspective on students’ progress toward independence. In our program, we developed and used assessments such as the professionalism evaluation form and self-assessment form which are similar to rating scales or checklists used by training programs (e.g., practicum supervisor evaluation forms, clinic supervisor evaluation forms, and internship supervisor evaluation forms). Accredited programs may adopt similar assessments to the ones used in this program, use other available assessments (e.g., Price et al., 2017), or they may already have assessments of their own which can be adapted. It is
1 3
important, however, for programs to collaborate with clinic professionals to refine them to (a) match the objectives of the site and (b) reflect priorities that clinic professionals may have in terms of professional skills, behaviors, and attitudes. continuously evaluate outcomes Continuous evaluation is vital to individual student development, program improvement, and accountability to accreditors and constituents (Hernandez, 2012). We would recommend encouraging students to deliver feedback based upon their individual needs and previous experiences and adapt the programming to assure their continual skill acquisition and ability to meet their education goals. Competency assessments provide programs an opportunity for self-examination and when those assessments are carried out in independent training sites, program faculty can learn things about the quality of their program. The current program’s evaluation measures were developed as a part of a grant project. School psychology training programs have more extensive requirements for competency assessment. Fortunately, the APA (https:// www. apa. org/ ed/ gradu ate/ compe tency) and NASP (https:// www. naspo nline. org/) have a number of resources for doing assessments that can span both functions, student competency assessment, and program outcome reporting. limitations There are numerous limitations to be noted. First, it is important to note that this paper is not an empirical study but rather a program evaluation. Thus, the evaluation measures were developed for the purpose of determining the outcome of increase in student knowledge and skill acquisition, and student satisfaction with the programming. Although not formally evaluated, the feasibility of collaborating with a pre-existing well established university school psychology program and a UCEDD center was attempted and successfully achieved. Another limitation was the attrition of several students. Although two students left for medical reasons, the number of total students trained was less than the expected amount. Finally, although written assignments and projects were graded by the faculty, the primary outcome measurements of knowledge and skill acquisition were based upon student perceived self-report. conclusion With the increasing prevalence of young children diagnosed with ASD, the demand for qualified personnel and behavioral health work force to meet the diagnostic and
clinical services needed for toddlers/preschoolers in the school system and community remains a daunting task. To identify early signs, diagnose in a timely manner, and assure early intervention services are delivered, clinicians from a variety of related disciplines need to join forces in identifying focused training tracks within their specialty (Gardner et al., 2022). Although NASP (2015) calls for school psychologists to be prepared to assess and identify young children with ASD, and deliver evidenced based interventions, many school psychologists feel ill equipped and unprepared to meet this need (Harris et al., 2020). The described specialization track provides an exemplar that is feasible to implement within a school psychology program. Although this project was funded through a Personnel Preparation grant, other programs may not have grant funding. Thus, academic leaders may find that developing a similar program may be feasible with the collaboration between institutes and clinical enterprises with a common goal of training and creating a pipeline of workforce for the clinic. There were many lessons that were learned throughout the 5-year program with resulting modifications to the curriculum and clinical experiences. Some examples of modifications were suggested by the trainees which included more time in the clinic setting and assisting with writing behavioral programs. The COVID-19 crisis interrupted the final cohort’s training sequence, requiring the second half of program year 2 learning experiences to be primarily via remote learning. Nonetheless, silver linings for learning opportunities arose. Most of the students completed their final year of the program observing virtually modified diagnostic evaluations, delivery of ABA interventions, and parentmanagement training interventions. The notable successes of this project were that all 15 students showed improvement in the knowledge, skills, and competencies in delivering evidenced based care to children with ASD. The training curriculum was conducive to active learning such that both university-based and clinic-based didactic training occurred concurrently with the applied clinical experiences provided through the community-based facility. Finally, high levels of satisfaction with the program were expressed by the trainees and faculty members. The collaboration between interprofessional and inter-agencies exemplified in this program enhanced the scope, depth, and breadth of the training experience for the graduate students and improved satisfaction of faculty members across both institutions. 1 3