The switch to emergency remote teaching (ERT) due to the first COVID-19 lockdown demanded a lot from university lecturers yet did not pose the same challenge to all of them. This study sought to explain differences among lecturers (n = 796) from universities in France, Germany, Switzerland, and the UK in their use of educational technology for teaching, institutional support, and personal factors. Guided by the Social Cognitive Theory (SCT), lecturers’ behavior (educational technology use), environment (institutional support), and personal factors (ERT self-efficacy, continuance intentions, and demographics) were examined. Latent class analysis was employed to identify different types of lecturers in view of educational technology use, while multinomial regression and Wald chi-square test were used to distinguish classes. The largest latent class were Presenters (45.6%), who focused on content delivery, followed by Strivers (22.1%), who strived for social interaction, Routineers (19.6%), who were ready for online teaching, and Evaders (12.7%), who evaded using technology for educational purposes. Both personal factors and perceived institutional support explained class membership significantly. Accordingly, Evaders were older, less experienced, and rarely perceived institutional support as useful. Routineers, the Evaders’ counterparts, felt most self-efficient in ERT and held the highest continuance intentions for educational technology use. This research suggests that universities engage lecturers in evidence-based professional development that seeks shared visions of digital transformation, networks and communities, and design-based research. 1. conclusions, limitations, and future research Two years after the first COVID-19 lockdown and ERT at universities, lecturers’ capabilities and their technological environment have changed. Now, in this post-pandemic phase of digital transformation at universities, the question is how sustainable the enforced digitalization boost was for technology-enhanced learning. The person-centric approach of the present study revealed that lecturers started their journey into online teaching from different starting points. Personal factors, educational technology, and institutional support diverged among them, as reflected in the classification of lecturers into the four classes found in this study. Based on lecturers’ experiences and study findings, it is likely that professional development happened due to this emergency. At least the ice has been broken in regard to educational technology use. In other words, lecturers had the chance to gather experiences, which is a great advantage for moving forward in the digital transformation of university teaching [16,45]. As the Social Cognitive Theory [24] suggests, it is crucial that all of the factors listed therein be considered in the development of post-pandemic university teaching. On the one hand, lecturers must be prepared on an individual level, as they have different prerequisites like experience, self-efficacy, competencies, and beliefs [12,34,42,48,85]. Professional development with the scope of the TPACK framework [48] would ensure that the interweaving of pedagogical, technical, and professional knowledge serves the quality of teaching and learning [29]. On the other hand, universities must deliver a solid technological environment for lecturers, including a variety of digital technologies, but also technological and pedagogical support regarding educational technology use [23,56]. It is gratifying that most of the lecturers studied were able to pass on their teaching content to the students during ERT. However, there remains the group of Evaders who need special attention in the development of post-pandemic university teaching. These hold a particularly evading and resisting stance when it comes to educational technology use. These facts once more stress the importance of lecturer professional development that is enabled through a solid technological foundation that goes hand in hand with a shared vision for educational technology use, networks and communities, and design-based research [86]. This study has limitations in the following aspects. Lecturers could partake voluntarily in this study. Considering the stressful time of the first COVID-19 lockdown, it is probable that lecturers who had spare resources filled out the survey, which manifested in the low response rate of below 20% per each university. This could have resulted in a positive bias towards educational technology use and the related constructs. In addition, person-centric approaches are prone to sample-specific results, damping generalizability. However, the latent class analysis conducted is a model-based method controlled by fit indices, which is a strength of the study. Furthermore, despite low response rates, the lecturers who participated in this study varied in their backgrounds, experiences, and disciplines, which
allowed for a holistic display of latent classes. Another strength is the sound theoretical foundation of this study. The Social Cognitive Theory makes it possible to place relevant factors and outcomes in a strong theoretical framework that enables interpretation. The results are consistent with other studies and thus confirm the theoretical approach, which underlines the importance and validity of the results of this study, not to mention the replicability of the approach. Second, the cross-sectional study design only allows for exploratory analysis of the data to answer the research question, and no causal conclusions can be drawn. Third, the indicators of the latent class analysis are based only on self-reported integration of digital technologies