This research explores the relationships between trait mindfulness, self-compassion, selftalk frequency, and experience with mindful practice. We expected to find that positive self-talk would be positively related to mindfulness and self-compassion, and negative self-talk would be negatively related to these variables. Participants (N = 342) were recruited through a university research pool, as well as via social media posting. The participants completed two measures of trait mindfulness (the 15-item Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire and the Trait Toronto Mindfulness Scale), two measures of self-talk (the Self-Talk Scale and the Automatic Thoughts Questionnaire—Revised), and the Self-Compassion Scale short form. The results showed moderate positive correlations between (1) positive self-talk and trait mindfulness and (2) positive self-talk and self-compassion. A significant negative correlation also emerged between negative self-talk and trait mindfulness. Additional analyses indicated no moderating effects of mindfulness experience on self-talk or self-compassion in predicting trait mindfulness. We discuss implications for the significance of the relationship between self-talk and mindfulness for the effective implementation in future treatment methodologies. 1. conclusions about the specifics of the relationship between self-compassion and the other variables of interest. 5.2. implications for future research Future research should continue to explore associations between self-talk frequency and other cognitive variables, as were examined in this study with self-compassion and trait mindfulness. Although experience with mindfulness practice did not help to predict correlations between intrapersonal communicative variables and trait mindfulness, there is still support for a connection between self-oriented cognition and other cognitive variables which have been historically observed to affect treatment outcomes. Cognitive disruptions, such as anxiety and obsessive-compulsive tendencies, which were previously noted to be associated with increased self-talk and decreased self-regulation [35], are commonly treated with interventions which target the negative thought patterns produced by the cognitive disruptions. Moreover, this treatment approach is often accomplished by incorporating mindfulness-based training. It would be worthwhile to further investigate this relationship in such a way that changes in self-talk frequency and other self-oriented variables might be observed to directly correspond with changes in individual mindfulness. Additionally, future studies could explore the possibility of using mindfulness interventions to better target certain established categories of self-talk and self-talk content to contribute to the treatment of mental health disorders and ruminative coping styles. Exploring the notion of self-talk as a transdiagnostic component could be extremely helpful in the case of treatment planning. In taking steps to identify what types of negative self-communication a client uses, service providers would be able to better serve the client by adapting the therapeutic intervention to the relevant self-communication areas in which work is needed to see long-term psychological improvement. Previous research has already shown that interventions which promote mindful self-compassion can be especially beneficial in the management of chronic symptoms of posttraumatic stress [23]. It appears that these kinds of interventions could be an effective way to combat the self-communicative maintenance component of many recurrent psychological disorders. Expanding upon this idea, there is a possibility that the exploration of self-talk style recognition could be more generally employed in the selection of a mindfulness intervention style most appropriate to a client’s patterns of self-communication. Research by Woods and Proeve [24], for instance, sought to establish a relationship between mindfulness and self-compassion as they relate to shame-proneness. They found that self-compassion levels were predictive of proneness to feelings of shame. However, the same relationship was not observed between shame-proneness and mindfulness. This suggests that individuals who are more prone to feelings of shame may benefit from a self-compassionfocused intervention, rather than one targeted more particularly to the development of a mindful disposition. 5.3. conclusions In summary, the present findings suggest that a relationship does exist between trait mindfulness and internal variables (e.g., intrapersonal communication and a selfcompassionate attitude) which affect emotional and cognitive regulation. Furthering our knowledge of the range of ways in which these metacognitive factors can interact with and affect psychological outcomes is worth prioritizing in the field to assist with the development of personalized intervention methods designed to combat psychopathology. As
previous research by Hölzel et al. purports, mindfulness practice alone engages several cognitive mechanisms which result in the reduction in negative symptomology associated with psychopathology [10]. The present findings contribute to a more fleshed out understanding of the intertwining of inner experiences which may impact overall treatment efficacy and efficiency.