Background: Virtual reality (VR) using head-mounted displays (HMDs) has demonstrated to be an effective tool for treating various somatic and psychological symptoms. Technological advances and increased affordability of VR technology provide an interesting option for delivering psychological interventions to patients in palliative care. The primary aim of this systematic review was to synthesise the available research on the use of VR for enhancing psychological and somatic outcomes for palliative care patients. Secondary aims included assessing general satisfaction and overall usability. Method: A pre-registered systematic literature search was conducted according to PRISMA guidelines using OVID Emcare, Cochrane Library, Embase, Medline, PsycINFO, and PubMed Care Search: Palliative Care Knowledge Network. Peer-reviewed experimental, quasiexperimental, observational, case, and feasibility studies consisting of single or multiple VR sessions using HMDs that reported psychological and/or somatic outcomes were included. Results: Eight studies published between 2019 and 2021 were included, representing 138 patients. While the reported quantitative psychological and somatic outcomes were ambiguous, the qualitative outcomes were largely positive. Participants were generally satisfied with VR, and most studies reported the VR interventions as usable, feasible, and acceptable. Conclusions: VR shows promise in palliative care and generally addresses a range of symptoms with few adverse effects. Future research should consist of adequately powered RCTs evaluating dosage and focusing on providing meaningful activities to enhance outcomes further. 1. conclusions can be drawn on the effectiveness of VR. However, there appears to be a pattern across the statistical results in which significant somatic and psychological symptom improvement were observed where the VR experience was made more personally meaningful by providing a tailored experience. Several mechanisms may underlie these findings. The first possible mechanism that can help explain the improvements in psychological symptomatology in studies that provided a personally meaningful experience is the reminiscence concept. It has previously been demonstrated that reminiscence can provide psychological benefits [36]. This intervention is primarily used with older adults who find sharing autobiographical memories a meaningful activity; its goal is to activate the social functions of reminiscence to enhance positive feelings and a sense of identity [36]. This mechanism is supported by Niki et al. [23], who noted that memories of the destination visited may have influenced the positive results. Therefore, VR could be a useful tool to facilitate reminiscence sessions in a palliative care setting because of its ease of use, portability, and ability to immerse the user [16,17]. Future research should consider using VR to facilitate other evidence-based psychological therapies such as dignity therapy to enhance outcomes in palliative care patients. While using VR to facilitate other evidence-based psychological therapies in palliative care is exciting, the concepts of distraction and relaxation may also contribute to improvements. There were studies reviewed here that contained feedback from participants relating to a sense of being removed from their current situation during the VR intervention, which may have relieved somatic and psychological symptoms [32–34]. The effectiveness of VR distraction for pain is well established [37]. However, results may be influenced by patient population and type of pain [38,39]. This review included participants with different conditions and at varying stages of disease progression, which may have contributed to the mixed results. Although the results are inconclusive at this stage, using VR as a tool for evidence-based therapies in palliative care is promising. 4.2. general satisfaction with vr The only study that assessed satisfaction quantitatively found significant improvements in the VR experience only in participants who visited a memorable place [23], similar to the somatic and psychological outcomes also reported by Niki et al. [23]. Qualitative feedback in the remaining studies found that patients appeared to be generally satisfied with the VR intervention. In line with the psychological and somatic outcomes, the patients’ general satisfaction with their VR experience seems to differ depending on the offered intervention. For example, participants that were given a choice of their VR experience appeared to describe the experience more positively [22,32] than those who were offered a 3.5-min looped beach scene [35]. Furthermore, the content quality and the HMD device may influence the user’s immersion and experience in the virtual environment. For example, high-quality content combined with HMD hardware that can display content at a high resolution may provide the user with a better experience [40]. This is relevant here because various content and VR technologies were used across the studies considered for this review (see Table 1), and may have influenced the VR experience. Another variable that may influence the VR experience is the interactivity of the intervention offered. Interactivity and enjoyment are positively correlated [41]. The ability to interact in the virtual environment was requested by participants in Brungardt et al. [34]. Furthermore, Johnson et al. [30] stated that providing interaction may increase therapeutic benefits. However, there is a potential problem with interactivity in a palliative care population for those with limited mobility, as VR controllers must be used to interact with the virtual environment. Some applications now offer voice control which could help with this problem in the future. While consistency between research will always be challenging to achieve, the quality and interactivity of VR to improve the experience and general satisfaction should be considered in future research. Healthcare 2022, 10, 1222 12 of 15 4.3. usability of vr Overall, studies found the VR intervention usable, feasible, and acceptable. Some isolated negative feedback could partially be explained by fitment of the HMD or dissatisfaction with the intervention [34,35]. In addition, technical issues and time to create content were reported [22,33]. The increasing availability of content and current generation HMDs that are lighter with improved head straps should mitigate some of these issues reported. The overall acceptability of the VR interventions is consistent with previous studies [5,42]. However, the use of VR in a palliative care population requires extra care due to the presentation of the patients, many of whom are often older or frail. The study by Johnson et al. [30] provided a 5 min training session on the use of the HMD and hand controllers and stated that multiple VR sessions might allow participants to become more proficient. This population consists of patients with diverse needs and abilities, and some will likely need more instruction or assistance than others. This may have implications for feasibility if trained individuals are required to teach the user how to set up and properly operate the VR device. Current and continual improvement of HMD technology will assist with improving usability that may also make VR more appealing for patients in a palliative care setting. Although the novelty of the VR experience can be seen as a benefit to recruitment, the question of what happens when the novelty of the experience wears off and participants are no longer interested in engaging remains. Indeed, Johnson et al. [30] had one participant report that they were happy that they now knew what it was like to use a VR headset. However, in the study by Ferguson et al. [35], one participant stated, “it’s a one-time experience; you don’t need it twice” (p. 813). There were few adverse or minor negative effects reported from HMD use. An increase in crying and hallucinations in two participants at 3–5 h following the intervention reported by Johnson et al. [30] is of most concern. This effect highlights the importance of monitoring for negative side effects after a VR experience in the hours immediately following the intervention. Indeed, a 2015 study found that visual hallucinations occurred in six of 23 patients with Parkinson’s disease who had participated in an immersive VR protocol [43]. Therefore, extra care and follow-up are needed when using VR interventions in patients with neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s and dementia. Furthermore, study protocols should include measures of side effects to monitor for symptoms during and after VR sessions, as there were studies in this review that did not report how well tolerated VR was. 4.4. limitations The studies in this review considered many different palliative care patients with a range of diagnoses and stages of disease progression. However, limitations of the studies considered in this review include heterogeneity between the measures and the small sample sizes in each study. With only three studies using a validated symptom measure, the majority of the data in this review were qualitative, and limited statistical evidence was available. No RCTs were found, and no studies utilised true control groups. Furthermore, a wide variety of VR technologies were used, including older systems using smartphones inserted into the HMD. Finally, seven of the eight included studies were judged as having a moderate or high risk of bias. 5. conclusions and future directions The use of VR has promise for addressing a range of symptoms in palliative care patients. Most studies included in this review showed a positive effect on symptoms of interest with few adverse effects. The promising results found in the included studies provide the groundwork for further investigating the use of VR in palliative care. Constantly increasing the availability of VR content and improvements in HMD hardware will assist in improving the VR experience and enhancing outcomes. Healthcare 2022, 10, 1222 13 of 15
Recruitment of patients in palliative care is challenging. Barriers include a lack of interest from participants, the nature of their illness, and the identification of participants that meet inclusion criteria [44].