Background Many studies have highlighted the clinical relevance of food addiction (FA) by showing its association with psychopathological severity and even more when co-occurring with binge eating disorder. It was suggested that the association between FA and greater psychopathological severity could be accounted for by a history of traumatic experiences. The present study examined the relationship between childhood trauma (including peer victimization, abuse, and neglect) and maladaptive eating behaviors (FA, binge eating, and grazing) and explored whether childhood trauma predicts FA when controlling for binge eating, grazing, and other confounding variables. Methods One hundred fourteen adult women seeking psychological help for problems related to eating or weight completed questionnaires measuring FA, binge eating, grazing, depressive symptoms, peer victimization, and childhood abuse and neglect. methods One hundred fourteen adult women seeking psychological help for problems related to eating or weight completed questionnaires measuring FA, binge eating, grazing, depressive symptoms, peer victimization, and childhood abuse and neglect. results FA showed significantly small to moderate positive correlations with all measures of childhood trauma, except for physical neglect. A hierarchical regression, including binge eating, grazing, depressive symptoms, age, and childhood trauma explained 55% of FA variance, with 7% of variance explained uniquely by childhood trauma. conclusions This study supports that FA is related to childhood trauma and provides a potential explanation for the association of FA with greater psychopathological severity. From a clinical perspective, FA provides an accurate and quick assessment of psychopathological severity and represents an essential complement to the evaluation of eating disorders related to overweight. Categories: Psychiatry, Psychology, Nutrition Keywords: bullying, interpersonal trauma, peer victimization, obesity, food addiction, binge eating, abuse conclusions This study supports that FA is related to childhood trauma and provides a potential explanation for the association of FA with greater psychopathological severity. From a clinical perspective, FA provides an accurate and quick assessment of psychopathological severity and represents an essential complement to the evaluation of eating disorders related to overweight. Categories: Psychiatry, Psychology, Nutrition Keywords: bullying, interpersonal trauma, peer victimization, obesity, food addiction, binge eating, abuse introduction In the last two decades, many neuroimaging and experimental studies using animal models have suggested that addictive processes may be involved in the overconsumption of highly palatable food (i.e., processed calorie-dense foods) [1-2]. These studies rapidly led to the concept of food addiction (FA), which has been operationalized by adapting the diagnostic criteria for substance-related and addictive disorders (SRAD) of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) [3]. Since then, the Yale Food Addiction Scale has been the measure of choice to assess FA [4-5]. Although FA is not a psychiatric disorder included in the DSM-5, many studies have highlighted its clinical relevance by showing that it was associated with higher BMI and greater psychopathological severity (e.g., higher psychiatric comorbidities, cravings, shape and weight concerns, and psychological distress) and, even more importantly, when co-occurring with binge eating disorder (BED) [6-10]. To account for these findings, Davis proposed that FA might be the most severe form of BED [8]. Reviewing many neurobiological, psychological, and behavioral pieces of evidence, she proposed an (over)eating continuum that presents a dimensional view based on eating severity, degree of compulsiveness, and level of impairment. That continuum starts with homeostatic eating, then passive forms of overeating, and then different forms of loss-of-control eating (i.e., binge eating episodes, BED, and finally FA at the very end of the continuum). The association between FA and greater psychopathological severity could also be accounted for by more frequent traumatic experiences in the past [11]. The association with childhood cumulative trauma (i.e., an accumulation of several interpersonal trauma during childhood) is well documented, but the associations
