Individuals with disabilities are affected by their environment in different ways, and one important factor involves how these individuals are perceived by others. This article focuses on rehabilitation professionals and the social representations of people with learning disability or autism spectrum disorder, as this group’s life situation is largely influenced by the professionals who work with them in their everyday lives. An association study, which is an established method in the theory of social representations, was carried out to gain more insight; in total, 121 rehabilitation professionals were included in the study. The results indicate that, when thinking about the target group, the respondents often associated the individuals in the group with work and the working process. A relational representation emerges where the individual is not perceived as someone with independent agency but rather as a person whose characterization is assigned in relation to the work tasks. Despite this, the respondents were sympathetic to the individuals and this work. The study also shows that the professionals’ social representations of the target group differs depending on what organization they belong to and that the various denominations of the individuals used in the organizations are not appreciated by the professionals. social representations of persons with learning disability or autism spectrum disorder among rehabilitation professionals in sweden  per germundsson Malmö University, Department of Social Work, Sweden
Article original ● Original Article abstract Individuals with disabilities are affected by their environment in different ways, and one important factor involves how these individuals are perceived by others. This article focuses on rehabilitation professionals and the social representations of people with learning disability or autism spectrum disorder, as this group’s life situation is largely influenced by the professionals who work with them in their everyday lives. An association study, which is an established method in the theory of social representations, was carried out to gain more insight; in total, 121 rehabilitation professionals were included in the study. The results indicate that, when thinking about the target group, the respondents often associated the individuals in the group with work and the working process. A relational representation emerges where the individual is not perceived as someone with independent agency but rather as a person whose characterization is assigned in relation to the work tasks. Despite this, the respondents were sympathetic to the individuals and this work. The study also shows that the professionals’ social representations of the target group differs depending on what organization they belong to and that the various denominations of the individuals used in the organizations are not appreciated by the professionals. Keywords: Rehabilitation, social representations, professionals, learning disability, autism spectrum disorder Résumé
Les individus avec des incapacités sont affectés par leur environnement de plusieurs façons, entre autres par la manière dont ils sont perçus des autres. Cet article se penche sur les représentations des professionnels de la réadaptation envers les gens vivant des difficultés d’apprentissage ou qui vivent avec le spectre de l’autisme, car les situations de vie de ces derniers sont grandement influencées par les professionnels avec lesquels ils travaillent au quotidien. Une étude par association, qui est une méthode établie dans la théorie des représentations sociales, fut entreprise afin d’approfondir les connaissances. Au total, 121 professionnels de la réadaptation ont participé au projet. Les résultats indiquent que, quand les professionnels pensent à leur clientèle, ils associent ce groupe au travail et au processus de travail. Une représentation de type relationnelle émerge où les personnes ne sont pas comme telle autonomes, mais plutôt associées aux tâches qu’elles réalisent. Malgré cela, les répondants avaient des attitudes sympathiques envers les individus et le travail. Cette étude montre aussi que les représentations sociales des professionnels envers les gens qu’ils aident diffèrent selon l’organisme auquel ils appartiennent et que les nombreuses dénominations par ces organismes à l’égard des individus ayant des incapacités ne sont pas appréciées par les professionnels. Mots-clés : Réhabilitation, représentations sociales, professionnels, difficultés d’apprentissage, spectre de l’autisme
Social Representations of Persons with Learning Disability or Autism Spectrum Disorder Among Rehabilitation Professionals in Sweden conclusion Overall, this study shows that, although few significant differences were found, the professionals’ social representations of the target group differed depending on what organization they belonged to. Several factors may form the basis for these differences; in this study, the differences in working conditions and how the individual is denominated are especially focused on. Also, the study shows that the professionals’ representations of the users are closely linked to the working process. From an organizational perspective, the representations are assumed to affect the activities, especially in matters related to collaboration with other parties.