Background: Worldwide, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in profound loss of life among older adults living in long-term care (LTC) homes. As a pandemic response, LTC homes enforced infection control processes, including isolating older adults in their rooms, canceling therapeutic programs, and restricting family member visits. Social isolation negatively impacts older adults in LTC, which may result in increased rates of anxiety, depression, physical and cognitive decline, disorientation, fear, apathy, and premature death. Isolation of older adults can also cause an increase in responsive behaviors (eg, yelling, hitting, calling out) to express frustration, fear, restricted movement, and boredom. To respond to the challenges in LTC and support frontline staff, older adults, and family members, a novel registered practical nurse (RPN)-led delivery of the PIECES approach for addressing responsive behaviors among older adults with dementia using virtual training/mentoring was implemented in Canadian LTC homes. PIECES employs a personand family/care partner–centered collaborative team-based approach to provide education and capacity-building for nurses; engages families as active participants in care; and embeds evidence-informed practices to provide personand family-centered care to older adults with complex needs, including dementia. Objective: The aim of this study was to describe the experiences of LTC staff, family/care partners, and older adult research partners with implementation of a novel RPN-led virtual adaptation of the PIECES care-planning approach for responsive behaviors in two Canadian LTC homes during the COVID-19 pandemic. JMIR Nursing 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e42731 | p. 1 https://nursing.jmir.org/2022/1/e42731 (page number not for citation purposes) Garnett et al JMIR NURSING keywords long-term care; older adults; families; responsive behaviors; qualitative; COVID-19; PIECES; nurse(s); care home; infection; therapeutic; anxiety; depression; cognitive; fear; death; dementia; communication; technology conclusion This study entailed implementing a recognized clinical care planning tool (PIECES) in a virtual format to support the care of older adults experiencing responsive behaviors in LTC within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Findings suggest that virtual videoconferencing approaches to team-based care planning can be successfully implemented in LTC, and provide increased opportunities for engagement and inclusivity for LTC staff, family members, and older adults living in LTC. These findings are important because they indicate that family members can continue to be engaged in the care of older adults despite pandemic or outbreak situations, which may necessitate constraints on in-person participation.