Physical inactivity can influence children’s executive functions with severe impact on wellbeing and academic learning. The objective is to study the effect of leisure time sport on executive functions in Danish 1st grade children, and secondary to explore if socio-economy is a confounder for associations between leisure time sport and executive functions. This study is a sub-study nested within a cluster-randomized controlled trial with two arms (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02488460). 505 children from twelve schools, mean age 7.2 ± 0.3 years participated. Outcomes for executive function were “Modified Eriksen Flanker/Reverse Flanker Task” and “Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function” (BRIEF-P). Parents used SMS-tracking to register their children’s leisure time sport. Multivariate analyzes was performed using mixed linear regression, with adjustment for highest parental education, sex, municipality, and school-type. We found that leisure time sport seems to significantly improve working memory (WM) with nearly 20%, and furthermore it seems to be a significant predictor of ‘Initiate’ (the ability to begin an activity, to generate ideas, responses or problem-solving strategies). Socio-economy was not found to be a confounder. This study lends support to the hypothesis that leisure time sport is related to working memory capacity in children. 1. conclusions, whilst also considering the significant variability observed in children in general. In comparison 200 tasks have been used in the Flanker/Reverse Flanker Task in other studies [73,74]. Thus, this could be a limitation in our study. Although BRIEF is often used as an assessment tool in research [58,75] it has only been examined to a very limited extend for its psychometric abilities in relation to children with no disabilities. McAuley et al. [75] argue that BRIEF is better suited to finding behavioral problems than measuring EFs; as such, they advise and recommend that it is important for future studies to verify the validity of BRIEF by comparing the questionnaire to tasks that require EF in more complex contexts. This was not done in our study and possibly constituting another limitation. Collecting data on LTS from SMS-track was assumed to be easy and convenient for the parents. However, in cleaning the raw data, it was observed that several parents wrote statements for responses (instead of numbers as they were supposed to report) regarding
Children 2022, 9, 1458 15 of 18
their inconvenience answering consecutive SMS’s over such a long period. All parents were informed about the duration of the main study [58], but still, it is imagined that they were hampered by the repeated requests for their attention to the study. Nevertheless, it is a strength of the study regarding recall biases. Quite a lot of statistical tests were performed, so there is a risk that the few statistically significant findings are chance findings. We used a significance level of p = 0.05 and believe it to be appropriate for the results and interpretation thereof. Correction for multiple analyses were not performed, it could have been done as hypothesis generating. 10. conclusions This longitudinal study shows that LTS seems to have a positive effect on WM and seems to be a predictor for the BRIEF sub-score Initiate in 1st grade children. The adjustment with HPE data did not reveal any clinically relevant difference for LTS predicting EFs.