Purpose: Previous studies are based on social exchange theory to explore the influence of leadership style on employees’ deviant innovation behavior. However, deviant innovation is risky, not supported by the organization, and is expected to benefit the long-term development of the organization. The key to the problem lies in how to guide employees to think and solve problems from the perspective of the organization, instead of just relying on material or spiritual exchange and return. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to analyze the relationship between coaching leadership, interactional justice, organizational identification and employees’ deviant innovation from the perspective of changing cognition. Methods: This work surveyed employees in 26 Chinese enterprises in more than 10 regions. Questionnaires were distributed to 450 employees, the first round of survey mainly investigated demographic information of employees and coaching leadership style of supervisors, and the second round of survey mainly investigated employees’ organizational identification, interactional justice, and deviant innovation behavior. By tracking and matching, 340 valid questionnaires were finally obtained. Spss 22.0 was used to describe all the study variables; Mplus 7.0 is used to carry out a confirmatory factor analysis and a multi-path regression model. Results: According to self-categorization theory, the results demonstrated that coaching leadership can directly or indirectly promote employees’ deviant innovation behavior through the dual-path intermediary and chain intermediary of interactional fairness and organizational identification. Conclusion: Under the open situation created by coaching leadership, coaching leaders will interact and communicate sincerely with employees, and employees’ cognition will change. The original “I” of employees will be transformed into “big self” with organizational membership, which will guide employees to show behaviors beneficial to the organization. Therefore, interactional justice and organizational identification can play a key role of the influence of coaching leadership on employees’ deviant innovation behavior. coaching leadership and employees’ deviant  innovation behavior: mediation and chain mediation of Interactional Justice and Organizational Identification lingling li 1, gui huang 2, yanling yan3 1School of Management, Zhengzhou Shengda University, Zhengzhou, People’s Republic of China; 2School of Business, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China; 3College of Economics and Management, Zhengzhou University of Light Industry, Zhengzhou, People’s Republic of China
Correspondence: Gui Huang, 510275, Tel +86 186 6608 0293, Fax +86 020 8411 2624, Email mnshg@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Purpose: Previous studies are based on social exchange theory to explore the influence of leadership style on employees’ deviant innovation behavior. However, deviant innovation is risky, not supported by the organization, and is expected to benefit the long-term development of the organization. The key to the problem lies in how to guide employees to think and solve problems from the perspective of the organization, instead of just relying on material or spiritual exchange and return. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to analyze the relationship between coaching leadership, interactional justice, organizational identification and employees’ deviant innovation from the perspective of changing cognition. Methods: This work surveyed employees in 26 Chinese enterprises in more than 10 regions. Questionnaires were distributed to 450 employees, the first round of survey mainly investigated demographic information of employees and coaching leadership style of supervisors, and the second round of survey mainly investigated employees’ organizational identification, interactional justice, and deviant innovation behavior. By tracking and matching, 340 valid questionnaires were finally obtained. Spss 22.0 was used to describe all the study variables; Mplus 7.0 is used to carry out a confirmatory factor analysis and a multi-path regression model. Results: According to self-categorization theory, the results demonstrated that coaching leadership can directly or indirectly promote employees’ deviant innovation behavior through the dual-path intermediary and chain intermediary of interactional fairness and organizational identification. Conclusion: Under the open situation created by coaching leadership, coaching leaders will interact and communicate sincerely with employees, and employees’ cognition will change. The original “I” of employees will be transformed into “big self” with organizational membership, which will guide employees to show behaviors beneficial to the organization. Therefore, interactional justice and organizational identification can play a key role of the influence of coaching leadership on employees’ deviant innovation behavior. Keywords: coaching leadership, deviant innovation behavior, interactional justice, organizational identification conclusion Based on the self-categorization theory, from the perspective of changing employees’ cognition, this study holds that employees’ insistence on concealing and implementing innovative ideas beneficial to the organization is inseparable from employees’ connection between their organizational membership and self-concept, and the realization of employees’ selfworth and organizational development. The realization of this process, on the one hand, requires the exchange of internal information and interpersonal interaction, on the other hand, requires employees to identify with their own organization
Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2022:15 https://doi.org/10.2147/PRBM.S381968 DovePress 3871
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
and think that they are an important part of the organization. At the same time, the identity of the organization needs to be based on sincere communication and interaction. Based on this logic, this study examines the relationship between coaching leadership style and employees’ deviant innovation and verifies a two-path mediating model, the chain mediation model of interactional justice and organizational identification, which are closely related to employees’ cognition. ethical statement The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.