While there is evidence of job-related antecedents of work engagement, there is little information in the relevant literature on cross-domain effects. The purpose of this empirical study is to examine this under-researched aspect by analyzing data from the conservation of resource theory and the jobdemand resource model. A moderated mediation model is proposed wherein COVID-19, the fear reduces service employees’ work engagement through job insecurity, and safety leadership acts as the supportive construct to cope with adverse effects of the pandemic on mentioned outcomes. The research, based on the experiences of 376 Norwegians working in the service sector, found that: the fear of COVID-19 had a major deterrent effect on employee engagement. One of the reasons for this relationship was job insecurity, which acted as a mediator between the COVID-19 fear and engagement, in work. In addition, the moderating role of the safety leadership in the relationship between COVID-19 anxiety and worker engagement was confirmed. In other words, workers who were under the supervision of safety leaders had lower links between these concepts, even if they were indirectly linked through job insecurity. With regard to the stress-related effects of COVID-19 on service personnel’s perceptions, attitude, and actions regarding their jobs and conditions of employment, this study has both theoretical and managerial implications. It also expands upon the existing understanding of how managers can handle such negative consequences. The limitations of the study’s contextual scope and sampling procedure of the study 1. conclusions The aim of this study was to analyze how the fear of COVID-19 affected workers in the service sector during the pandemic. The authors of [87] discussed the data collected in Norway after COVID-19 to investigate the factors affecting workers’ engagement in their jobs. However, they recommended further research on the moderating role of some characteristics of employment, particularly in the areas of work resources and expectations. Therefore, this study seems to be one of the first attempts to investigate this issue in the Norwegian service industry using the theory COR and the JD-R model. The following objectives were proposed for the study: (a) to determine the influence of fear of COVID-19 on job insecurity and work engagement; (b) to determine the influence of job insecurity on work engagement; (c) to determine the role of safety leadership as a moderator and mediator in these relationships. Data collected from service workers confirmed the premise. The study, which examined a relationship between the COVID-19 anxiety and job insecurity, is not only consistent with the COR hypothesis [88], but is also supported by previous studies [89–92]. For workers during the COVID-19 epidemic, uncertainty about one’s employment situation was exacerbated by fear of being laid off. That is, higher levels of job insecurity are the direct result of workers harboring unfavorable biases about the stability of their position. Service industry employees’ job insecurity likewise aggravates their work engagement. This causes the degeneration of the relationship between lower-level staff and the firm [57]. As the COR theory indicates [54], service industry staff who have inadequate work-related resources and/or lose their valued resources while attempting to manage their job insecurity, lose their confidence toward their management at the micro and their overall trust at the macro levels. Employees who view that the COVID-19 fear appears to be a widespread practice throughout the breakout of COVID-19, display anxiousness or stress and anxiety and for that reason have damaging understandings of work engagement. This finding is
likewise in agreement with the health impairment process of the JD-R model [93]. Similarly, the findings of the study validate the reciprocal relationship between job resources, personal resources and work engagement suggested by Xanthopoulou et al. [30]. Arguably, the systems established by safety leaders, their guidance and the effect of the motivation they provide to the employees in the leader-member relationship, will positively contribute to the materials and information which are accepted as important job features [67]. That is, the relationship between the COVID-19 fear and engagement will not be complete if the lost resources are disregarded. Additionally, the empirical analysis of the mediating influence of job insecurity on work engagement showed that the degree to which employees experienced the anticipation of job loss played a significant mediating role between the COVID-19 fear and work engagement. This negative significant relationship is in line with the study of Jiang and Lavaysse [46], where it is suggested that affective job insecurity had stronger relations with most of the work-related consequences, such as work engagement. Because the main reason that decreases the work engagement level of employees is not only related to the perceived threat to the continuity of employment (cognitive job insecurity); but also strongly linked with the emotion-based reaction which emerged due to the fear of COVID-19 (affective job insecurity). The informants chosen for this study agreed with the study’s interaction conclusion about the moderating influence of safety leadership on the aforementioned COVID-19 fear. Consistent with the JD-R model, staff members exhibit high job insecurity due to stress caused by the COVID-19 fear; however, when they perceive that they can cope with such fear thanks to support/resources from safety leadership, the interaction effect is likely to result in low levels of stress caused by COVID-19 tension. The findings of this study provide empirical support for the claim that safety leaders improve employee engagement by fostering a culture of safety in the workplace. Employees who believe that the COVID-19 fear seems to be a frequent practice during the outbreak of COVID-19, display uneasiness or anxiety, and as a result, have adverse judgments of work engagement, as suggested by the research findings. Job insecurity partially mediates this effect. 5. research implications  5.1. theoretical implications The outcomes of the current study shed brand-new light on and supply considerable insights into the repercussions of the COVID-19 fear. This is among the very first research studies providing empirical findings and conversations in this industry in the recent relevant literature. This empirical study points out the need, as postulated by several researchers [94–96], of examining the COVID-19 fear amongst service industry staff members throughout the COVID-19 pandemic process. This requirement is likewise evident considering that countless service employees are faced with layoffs or lost their positions/in the service industries [11]. The COVID-19 fear may cause high stress which may be an indication of failure to meet the commitments or pledges [97] according to the psychological contract theory, and for that reason deteriorates staff members’ work engagement [98]. The research study fills in this gap by evaluating the effect of the COVID-19 fear on work engagement amongst service industry staff. Second, the existing literature provides research studies that have connected the COVID-19 fear to conventional effects such as turnover intention, life and job satisfaction, emotional exhaustion and psychological distress [91,98]. As for what the COR theory confirms [54], high levels of inadequate resources and/or demanding conditions lead to undesired results. The COVID-19 fear literature does not have proof of the relationship of the COVID-19 fear to two vital constructs, such as job insecurity and work engagement. Even though Jung et al. [98] investigated the relationship between job insecurity and job engagement recently amongst hotel staff members, the COVID-19 fear was not investigated as a separate
variable in that study but considered as a situational variable instead. This study differs from the mentioned research, as it is the first to attempt to empirically test the COVID-19 fear within the Norwegian service industry where the linkages of the two mentioned constructs were investigated. 5.2. managerial implications This research study suggests several useful ramifications that can allow department supervisors/managers to act throughout and even after COVID-19, to retain skilled workers. To attain this, primarily the management should consider both the high level of stress and job security perceptions of employees which may affect their mental well-being, and their well-being while threatening employees in the organization during the pandemic diffusion. The management should not be budget-minded and just try to consider payroll cuts or reductions. That is, they need to be empathetic and should keep in mind that they send negative signals to employees in every singular decision, which it takes for the betterment of the organization’s financial outcomes, which reduces the bottom-line employees ‘overall belief in the organization. Service industry firms can follow the close communication with employees by giving some feedback about the organization’s position and set up some training programs (online or hybrid) to assist workers to cope with their uneasiness or stress and anxiety. In these online briefings or training, staff members may see that the organization does not underestimate their values as associates of the business, attempts to maintain them and assist them to establish strength and development. Using such an approach management may continue its credibility and can continue to keep and retain their skilled employees. In addition, management ought to go on organizing such workshops when COVID-19 is calmed. This is necessary due to the fact that service industry staff members who are often besieged with stress factors and struggle with stress and anxiety [99–101], would take advantage of establishing close positive communication, psychological strength, and security and confidence with other employees. 6. limitations and avenues for future research This study examines the consequences of the COVID-19 fear during the pandemic. This study used the convenience sampling method, which is often criticized for its selection bias, poor generalization or transferability [103]. The data was able to acquire information from informants in the Norway service industry.