In the field of epidemics, some vulnerable groups, such as older adults, are at greater risk. Many psychological, social, economic and physical hazards have threatened older adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. Some threats can be managed with medical system interventions. However, social and psychological challenges cannot be controlled quickly. People will have a better quality of life if they can take appropriate action in critical situations. There is a strong theoretical and empirical background that a sense of control and self-efficacy can promote psychological well-being. The main questions of this study included the following: What were the main problems experienced by older Iranian women during the outbreak of COVID-19? What coping methods did they use to control the situation? What were their views on the future? This research was conducted in Kerman city, the capital of Kerman Province. A phenomenological method was used. We interviewed 15 women over 65 years old. We extracted five main themes from the interviews. These themes were health issues, persistent anxiety, economic and social pressures, identifying unique solutions to the current situation, and optimism versus pessimism: what is the future? From the participants’ point of view, psychological, social and physical problems have disturbed them during the pandemic, especially at the beginning. However, they controlled their problems by using selective coping strategies. In Iran, planners can use the potential of the two institutions of family and religion to reduce the problems of older adults. * Behshid Garrusi behshidgarrusi@gmail.com; Bgarrusi@kmu.ac.ir Saideh Garousi Sgarousi@uk.ac.ir Ali Amirkafi ali.a.kafi97@gmail.com Faezeh Mohammadi Faezehmohammadi96@gmail.com 1 Social Sciences Department, Human Sciences School, Shahid Bahonar University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran 2 Preventive Medicine and Public Health Research Center, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran 3 Department of Community Medicine, Neuroscience Research Center, Institute of Neuropharmacology, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Pobox 444, Kerman, Iran 4410 S. Garousi et al. 1 3 1 conclusion The pandemic has created significant challenges for older adults. The adjustment and support of family and friends have been helpful during this period. However, the psychological consequences that remain after the outbreak still need to be addressed. In this study, family and religion are two important factors that can be used for strengthening the older adults’ sense of control and self-efficacy. Thus, these two institutions should be given special attention. The study results showed that social dynamics and individual behaviors, as well as family planning and networking with friends and peers, help older adults better deal with stressful situations.