Autism-Assistance Dogs (AADs) are highly-skilled service animals trained primarily to ensure the safety of an autistic child by preventing elopement and mitigating ‘meltdowns’. Although anecdotal accounts and case-studies have indicated that AADs confer benefits above and beyond safety, empirical support anchored in validated clinical, behavioral, and physiological measures is lacking. To address this gap, we studied children and their families before and after receiving a well-trained AAD using a within-subject, repeated-measures design. Notably, this study is the first to assess change in a biomarker for chronic stress in both autistic children and their parents. Final analyses included pre-/post-AAD data from 11 triads (parent/ handler-dog-child) demonstrating significantly positive psychosocial and biobehavioral effects of AADs. conclusions drawn from these AAD-teams should be considered in view of their highlyspecialized training and stringent certification criteria and may not be generalized across animals described as emotional support, therapy, comfort, or companion animals who have not received comparable levels of training. Second, we did not include a wait-list control group (families who applied for an AAD but did not receive a dog during the same period of time) or a non-wait-list control group (families from the community who had not applied for an AAD). Given the highly multifactorial nature of each family’s individual characteristics, the unpredictable length of time each family might be on the wait-list, and the limited number of AADs available, we decided to constrain the study to a single group, repeated measures design. The additional variability introduced by families who had not applied for an AAD (non-wait-list controls) would render comparison data even more difficult to interpret. Additionally, including a control group from further down the wait-list would require participant families to remain on the wait-list for the duration of the study collection period and we did not wish to interfere with standard operating procedures of the training program. In particular, we did not
want study participation to be a factor if an AAD candidate proved to be a good match for a control-family as collecting an appropriately-timed T2 assessment would delay the process of getting the AAD team started. Moreover, families unlikely to receive a dog during our collection period (i.e., bottom of the 3–5 year wait-list) would include a younger cohort of autistic children who would be poorly matched to the active group if we implemented a cross-sectional design. Further, families on the wait-list could not be restricted from introducing, discontinuing, or modifying therapies/medications during the study period; yet, these alterations would inexorably confound comparisons to the active group. While families who did receive an AAD were also not constrained from altering their treatment plans, the training process of becoming an AAD team is quite involved and we surmised that families would not have the time to modify their existing treatment plans substantially; we did not note any significant alterations in child therapies/medications pre-post-AADs in our sample but we could have factored in those changes to our final analysis as needed. Third, due to the high demand and low supply of qualified AADs, our sample size was expectedly quite small. In anticipation of this limitation, we chose a within-subject design to examine pre-/post-AAD changes for each family; we were able to demonstrate significant, quantifiable changes from T1 to T2. Also, because we were unable to collect all data from the third time point as originally planned, we were precluded from gauging if improvements were maintained long-term. Additional data points could have provided insight into whether continued interaction with AADs would lead to sustained and/or greater/fewer changes over time. For example, while we posit that some AAD effects follow a more protracted time course through indirect pathways, these may not be evident until more time has passed. One putative mechanism entails the proximal reduction of physiological arousal stress and an increase in feelings of physical safety with the AAD that may impact sleep quality distally in time. Several parent participants reported that their children have difficulty sleeping which, in turn, affected their own sleep quality. Sleep deprivation indubitably plays a role in mental health and well-being, which can then impact multiple levels of family systems and behavior (Mihaila & Hartley, 2018). However, several families noted that with the AAD’s presence, their children began sleeping through the night, perhaps due to an increased sense of security or their canine’s de-arousing capabilities. Next, we could not control for the myriad variables that may have contributed to changes over the study timeline. For example, we cannot rule out the impact of developmental change over the study months and families maintained their ongoing treatment and medication schedules while participating. Although our T2 data demonstrated significant improvements in participants relative to their T1 data, we
1 3
cannot be certain that changes were not due to variables such as maturation, concurrent treatments, or unknown environmental factors. Also, most measures were parent-report and parent-self report assessments, which may be subject to response bias. Yet, given that the autistic children in our study were quite young, heterogeneous in their presentation, and all had co-occurring challenges (e.g., non-verbal, comorbid NDDs), it was not feasible to administer an objective task-based or observational measure that would be developmentally appropriate for all participants. We were, however cautiously selective in the measures chosen for inclusion in our assessment battery; all instruments were validated, reliable (see Table 2), behavioral and psychosocial instruments that have been developed for and used widely to evaluate child functioning and development. Finally, we experienced difficulty when collecting samples for cortisol assay because several participants had very short or no scalp hair. Similar issues when collecting fingernail samples arose because some individuals bit their fingernails or kept their nails quite short. An alternative option that may offset some of these issues in future studies might be the use of toenail clippings to ascertain cortisol concentration. Overall, considering the heterogeneity of our participant families, we are reasonably confident that receiving an AAD, the one consistent change for all families during the study collection period, was a driving factor in positive outcomes. Nevertheless, findings based on our limited sample size must be interpreted with caution. conclusions To our knowledge, the present study is the first to examine psychosocial and biobehavioral effects of assistance dogs trained specifically for ASD using validated and standardized measures of family experience, parental stress, autism symptom severity, and child behavior; these data are also the first to evaluate a biological marker for chronic stress in both children and parents/caregivers. Our findings augment significantly our evidence-base for the benefits of AADs on autistic children and their families across multiple domains. At present, well-trained assistance dogs, particularly those for ASD, remain a highly limited ‘commodity’, requiring considerable, often prohibitively high, investment of resources by families and service dog providers. Average wait times for well-trained AADs can exceed 3 years and the estimated total cost to raise and train just one dog can surpass $55,000 (Cooper, 2021; Ensminger, 2010; Konrad, 2009). Further, after team certification, families must assume all financial responsibilities for canine care. Currently, no health insurance policies cover any of these expenses beyond the possible application of pre-tax healthcare accounts, (Internal Revenue Service, 2020), and most service dog providers require that families contribute at least part of the costs themselves. Additionally, while US federal law mandates access for service animals to all public areas including schools, the Americans with Disabilities Act also requires that the animal be under the handler's control at all times (ADA, 2010). However, because public facilities are not themselves responsible for service animals, schools do not have to provide handlers. AADs are trained to work as part of a triad, and unless an adult dog-handler is available, the child is still prohibited from bringing their AAD to school.