Studies have revealed the links between social capital and diet. However, the mediating role of psychological distress in this relationship has been understudied. This study aims to identify direct and indirect relationships between social capital and adherence to the Mediterranean diet among Lithuanian young adults and identify the mediating role of psychological distress in this relationship. Data were collected from 1336 young adults, aged 18–36 years; 40.5% were males. MEDAS was used to measure adherence to a healthy diet. Social capital was measured by eight separate items in terms of family support, social support, social cohesion, social trust, communication, collaboration, participation, and distant communication. Kessler’s six-item scale was used to assess psychological distress. Higher family support (β = 0.105), higher social participation (β = 0.294), and lower psychological distress (β = 0.073) directly predicted higher adherence to the Mediterranean diet. Social capital was indirectly related to adherence to the Mediterranean diet, with standardized effect sizes of 0.02–0.04, indicating small effect sizes. Thus, psychological distress mediates the relationship between social capital and a healthy diet. Given that social capital is related to psychological health and both directly and indirectly predicts healthy behavior in young adults, further longitudinal and experimental research is required to measure the effects of the intervention on incorporating, facilitating, encouraging, and implementing measures to strengthen the social connection between people and groups of people within the community, neighborhood, and organizations. 1. conclusions Social capital increases the probability of better adherence to a healthy diet by reducing psychological distress among young adults, predominantly students. As social capital encourages healthy nutrition in times of global crisis, it becomes particularly important for mental and physical health to build and maintain social capital. In addition, group-based
healthy nutrition programs should be initiated in universities and other organizations to provide young employees with the opportunity to build or maintain social capital, adapt to social norms, and improve their knowledge and skills in healthy nutrition. Bonds strengthened through social interaction may buffer psychological distress, thereby keeping young adults more adherent to healthy nutrition.