Academic achievement, measured with the grade point average (GPA), is a stable characteristic that has been associated with many sociodemographic and psychological variables; however, the relation of these variables with GPA has not been totally elucidated. The objective of this study was to perform an association of health, psychological and personal variables with GPA and non-verbal intelligence in low-academic performance population according to sex. We invited health sciences university students who had failed the same subject twice to complete a set of sociodemographic and psychological variables and a non-verbal intelligence test. The GPA, admission exam test and preparatory GPA were obtained. We included 124 students, and found that GPA was associated with non-verbal intelligence in women but not in men; in whom, having a job and having a romantic partner, were more correlated. In women, positive relations with others, emotion perception and weekly physical activity hours were marginally correlated with GPA; while in men, emotion regulation and self-motivation had a tendency of correlation with GPA. In addition, we found that non-verbal intelligence was associated somatization and the number of diseases in women. Academic achievement is regulated by different variables in each sex; therefore, intervention programs addressed by sex are needed to increase it. 1. conclusions In conclusion, we found that academic performance was mainly associated with non-verbal intelligence in women but not in men, in whom, other variables, including having a romantic partner and having a job, were more associated. Other sex differences were found: in women, the positive relations with others and emotion perception were marginally correlated with GPA; while in men, emotion regulation and self-motivation showed a tendency of correlation with GPA. In addition, in the multivariate analysis for men, many variables were included: admission exam test, self-motivation, neuroticism, having a romantic partner, having children (negatively) and weekly physical activity hours (negatively); while in women only 2 variables were included: non-verbal intelligence and preparatory GPA. Globally, these results emphasize the contribution of psychological variables to GPA in both genders, being of special interest, the social support provided by others or by a romantic partner; as well as the contribution of emotional abilities to GPA, including the emotion perception, self-motivation and emotion regulation.