Background: During the COVID-19 pandemic, China adopted a home isolation policy, which caused lifestyle changes for university students, including increased smartphone use. Several studies indicate that problematic smartphone use is associated with anxiety. However, this association has not been examined in the context of epidemics. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the duration of smartphone use was associated with anxiety in Chinese university students during the COVID-19 pandemic. Methods: Participants included 9716 university students (5458 men and 4258 women) from Liaoning, China. We assessed the duration of smartphone use with a self-reported questionnaire. Anxiety was assessed using the generalized anxiety disorder seven-item scale. A multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the adjusted association between smartphone use and anxiety. Results: After adjusting for confounding factors, we observed a positive association between smartphone use duration and the prevalence of anxiety in all participating students. Compared with short periods of smartphone usage, the odds ratios (95% confidence interval) for moderate and long smartphone usage duration were 1.17 (1.00, 1.36) and 1.58 (1.36, 1.83), respectively. This significant positive association did not change in the sex-stratified analysis (for both men and women). Conclusions: Our examination of the association between duration of smartphone uses and university students’ anxiety levels revealed that long smartphone use was associated with a high prevalence of anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic. 1. conclusions Despite the stated limitations, this study contributes to an understanding of the relationship between smartphone use and anxiety among Chinese university students during the COVID-19 outbreak. The results showed that lengthy smartphone usage duration was significantly related to a high prevalence of anxiety, and this association was independent with confounding factors. Although this relationship was revealed during the COVID-19 outbreak—a distinct period in modern history—it could be important information applicable to similar future situations. Considering that smartphone usage is playing an important role in university students’ daily life, this association may also apply to normal periods when the COVID-19 quarantine is over. Furthermore, the results provide vital information for the preventive medicine field. According to these results, it is necessary to control the use of smartphones in the case of epidemic emergencies, which relates to the effective prevention of anxiety disorders to a certain extent in university students.