This phenomenological exploratory multiple-case study design was conducted at an open distance e-learning university and a traditional contact residential university, and it was found that the participants viewed video conferencing under the COVID-19 lockdown period as an exhausting experience. A second major finding revealed that the participants were empowered with digital literacy skills to use video conferencing effectively. The current findings add to a growing body of literature on video conferencing with a focus on Zoom fatigue. Further research might explore the lived Zoom experiences of administrators, students, and a larger group of faculties over a longer period. The study findings must be considered when planning and implementing video conferencing for academics and students in open distance e-learning contexts. This study showed that video conferencing is one tool in the emergence of a digital zoom revolution that has radically changed the workspace. The evidence from this study suggests that Zoom fatigue is a reality check for work-related health management. keywords  covid-19 pandemic, multiple case study design, open distance e-learning, phenomenology, video conferencing, zoom fatigue  conclusion In this investigation, the aim was to assess academics’ lived experiences of an online behavioural phenomenon, zoom-fatigue, and suggest strategies to overcome video conference fatigue. This study has found that participants viewed video conferencing under the COVID-19 lockdown period as an exhausting experience that affects the quality of their physical and emotional dimensions of life. The multi-site academics agree that teaching or attending meetings using virtual streaming platforms under COVID-19 had a stressful and emotional taxing experience. A second major finding revealed that participants were empowered with digital literacy skills to use video conferencing effectively. Findings showed that ‘zoom-fatigue’ is viewed as a physical, emotional and energy-draining COVID-19 phenomenon. Also, the faculty agreed that video conferencing is one tool in the emergence of a digital zoom revolution that has changed the workspace exponentially. Nonetheless, several drawbacks were highlighted which need further inquiry. The evidence from this study suggests that zoom fatigue is a reality and the findings of this study must be studied in planning and implementing video conferencing for academics and students in a distance education context. Significantly, this study has explained how job demands in critical and emergency times, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, could lead to stress among faculty members. However, as emphasised in the JD-R Theory, resource availability is beneficial in reducing stress and eventual burnout while the converse situation holds. In the context of this study, internal resources (cognitive features and action patterns) of the faculty members served as their motivation which in turn helped to reduce their cognitive load in the face of the challenges. The current findings add to a growing body of literature on videoconferencing with a focus on zoom-fatigue whether in synchronous or asynchronous contexts. Also, the findings suggest that if the following recommendations are considered and included as features on video-conferencing applications they would help reduce video-conference fatigue: Automatic noise muting or alerting system; fatigue detection systems using either voice or facial cues or both; A feature that allows the scheduling of time allotment for individual agenda and breaks before the start of the meeting or during the scheduling of the meeting, this would serve to alert participants and enforce breaks; and also a feature that allows a presenter to hear himself or herself as other participants would, this would help the presenter deal with the silence in video-conference meeting where all the mics are muted except that of the presenter. Also, institutions should make efforts to train their faculty on the appropriate use of web-based video conferencing facilities while making policies to address the challenges they face in using such applications. The scope of this study was limited in terms of the
number of participants, the time factor and context that impacted on the specific findings so it could not be generalised.