Public safety personnel (PSP) are frequently exposed to potentially psychologically traumatic events (PPTEs) which can impact mental health. To help mitigate the negative effects of PPTEs, PSP commonly rely on peer support. Peer support generally refers to a wide variety of mental health resources that offer social or emotional assistance to a peer, and in some cases professional assistance. Despite the use of and demand for peer support, there is relatively little empirical evidence regarding effectiveness. The evidence gaps regarding peer support effectiveness may be due, in part, to inadequate guidelines and standards of practice that are publicly supported by a consensus among peer support providers. The current study was designed to explore the current conceptualization and implementation of peer support among Canadian PSP using a document analysis. The results indicate that peer support can be conceptualized via three models (i.e., peer-enabled, peer-led, peer-partnership) and implemented via two delivery methods (i.e., program, service). The research team proposed a novel diagram towards a typology of peer support to highlight the diversity in peer support conceptualization and implementation and provide a foundation for the development of mutually agreed-upon language and a shared framework. Overall, the current study can help inform peer support resources within and beyond PSP communities. 1. conclusions The current study explored the conceptualization and implementation of peer support that is available to Canadian PSP. The document analysis focused on organizations who self-identified as offering peer support to Canadian PSP. The results suggest that “peer” and “peer supporter” are ultimately idiosyncratically and contextually defined, and that “peer support” is a supportive relationship between peers and trained peer supporters; however, the models, programs, services, and content that are associated with peer support appear distinct across organizations, with potentially impactful differences. The research team proposed a novel diagram towards a typology of peer support (Figure 1) to provide clarity regarding the conceptualization and implementation of formal peer support. The typology diagram may further offer providers, users, and researchers with mutually agreed upon language and a shared framework.