conclusion This mini-review provides a bird eye view of the interdisciplinary field of mind, brain, and education on music aptitude, training, and cognitive transfer. Insights gained from synthesizing these bodies of works can inform educational neuroscience research concerning how gene-environmental interactions contribute to the unfolding of music aptitude across the lifespan, with sensitive period moderating the malleability of music aptitude through training and domain similarity predicting the magnitude of cognitive transfer. Overall, this mini review indicates that regardless of levels of innate aptitude, experience-induced neuroplasticity can occur as a result of music training and may be subject to the influence of sensitive period. Experience-induced neuroplasticity can be expressed as functional or structural brain changes (e.g., Schneider et al., 2002; Schlaug et al., 2005) that are often accompanied by enhanced behavioral performance (e.g.,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 903920
Hyde et al., 2009). The right auditory cortex, for example, has been shown to be malleable to music training (see Schneider et al., 2002) and is a good candidate for further investigations and replications. Music training can directly transfer to closely related cognitive domains such as auditory processing (near transfer). Training effects can also leak into more distantly related cognitive domains such as certain aspects of spatial and linguistic skills via mediumdistance transfer. Neuroplasticity research generally supports the notion that music training, especially when started early, was intensive, and lasted for several years, leave distinct neural signatures in the brain, accompanied by behavioral performance differences between musically trained and untrained groups (Rodrigues et al., 2010). Playing an instrument engages the whole brain that includes auditory processing, motor controls, executive functions, and bi-hemispheric communications. It therefore provides an ideal model to study how nature (music aptitude) and nurture (music training) work in tandem (White et al., 2013) in the making of a musician. The nature of sensitive period as expressed in music learning and how neuroplasticity moderates the training effects on the
expression of music aptitude (as outlined in the previous section) warrant further research using experimental, longitudinal, and neuroimaging methods. This research will also refine our understanding of issues with broader implications such as mindbrain relationship, the architecture of the mind, and the causal mechanism of the transfer of training effects at the neuronal and behavioral levels. Lastly, it should be noted that not all studies cited in support of some of the arguments made are independent from one another, meaning some studies cited are follow-up from a previous study and was led by a different researcher within the same research group (e.g., studies conducted by Järvelä and colleagues and Ullen and colleagues). Meta-analysts are advised to use cautions when polling studies directly from this minireview’s reference list without discerning the possible presence of dependency in findings reported by different authors within the same research group.