Objectives Tailored, evidence-based interventions are in high need for sexual minority men (gay, bisexual, and queer men who have sex with men) to address prevalent mental health issues and HIV/STI risk. This study describes the formative research that informed the development of Mindfulness-Based Queer Resilience (MBQR): a mindfulness-based intervention for health promotion among sexual minority men. Methods Guided by the ADAPT-ITT model, we conducted a series of interviews with community stakeholders, including sexual minority men with anxiety and depressive symptoms (n = 15) and mindfulness service providers with experience working with sexual minority men (n = 11). Thematic analysis was used for data analysis. Results Six intervention principles and seven key techniques/delivery considerations emerged relevant to intervention development. Principles included (a) reducing minority stress as a key theoretical guide, (b) affirming LGBTQ + identity and facilitating healthy identity development, (c) attending to intersectionality, (d) facilitating resilience and self-empowerment, (e) trauma sensitivity, and (f) promoting healthy relationships and a healthy community. Key techniques represent the pathways through which MBQR may address the adverse impacts of minority stress, including through attention control practice to facilitate agency and self-awareness, enhancing emotion regulation, reducing reactivity to minority stress-informed thoughts, self-compassion to increase self-acceptance, and reducing behavioral avoidance. Delivery considerations also included careful navigation regarding mindfulness and religion, as well as using modern technology to increase reach, access, and engagement. Conclusions If proven to be feasible and efficacious, MBQR may offer the potential to alleviate adverse impacts of minority stress and improve mental and sexual health of sexual minority men. method  participants Sexual Minority Men Participants Fifteen sexual minority men participated in the study. Men were eligible if they (a) resided in the USA, (b) read and spoke English, (c) had access to an electronic device that allowed for Zoom-based interviews, (d) were aged 18–34, (e) were assigned male at birth, (f) identified as a cisgender man, (g) identified as a sexual minority (e.g., gay, bisexual, queer, etc. ), (h) reported a lifetime history of condomless anal sex, (i) self-reported as HIV-negative
or status unknown, and (j) reported elevated symptoms of psychological distress, such that symptoms of depression and anxiety were at or above the mild cutoff (≥ 3) on the Patient Health Questionnaire-4 (PHQ-4) (Kroenke et al., 2009). Participants were on average 23.0 years old (SD = 2.5). Participants had varying degrees of experience with mindfulness, with some sexual minority men having never practiced mindfulness (n = 10, 66.7%) while others having accessed or attended mindfulness teachings before (e.g., via YouTube videos, apps, formal mindfulness class, etc.) (n = 5, 33.3%). Professional Provider Participants A total of 11 providers participated in the study. Professional providers had to either be (a) a professional mental health service provider (e.g., licensed social worker or mental health counselor) working with LGBTQ + individuals or (b) a professionally trained mindfulness teacher who had experience working with LGBTQ + individuals. Providers were on average 49.3  years old (SD = 14.4). Table  1 provides detailed demographics on sexual minority and provider participants. 1 3 procedure The current study is part of a larger NIH-funded project (K23AT011173) that aims to develop and test a mindfulness-based intervention to promote mental and sexual health among young adult sexual minority men. The project is guided by the ADAPT-ITT model (Wingood & Diclemente, 2008), a multi-phase procedure for intervention adaptation that includes an iterative process of formative data collection and protocol refinement, followed by a pilot trial to assess feasibility and acceptability. The current study presents the early stages of the adaptation process to uncover the principles and techniques of a mindfulness-based intervention for sexual minority men. Below we describe various phases of this iterative approach. Phases 1 and 2 involved a literature review of the needs of our population of focus (i.e., sexual minority men vulnerable to HIV/STI acquisition) and selection of an intervention for adaptation. As elaborated in the Introduction, addressing stress-related mental and behavioral health (e.g., depression, anxiety, sexual compulsivity) is key to health promotion among sexual minority men. MBSR was selected as the intervention of interest for adaptation for reasons described in the Introduction. Phase 3 focused on interviewing participants of the population of interest. Study advertisements were posted on social media platforms (Facebook, university listservs) and via LGBTQ + community-based organizations. Interested individuals were invited to learn more about the study, review informed consent, and complete an eligibility screening questionnaire online via clicking a link or scanning a QR code. Those who appeared eligible provided their contact information and met individually with research staff via videoconferencing (i.e., Zoom) to confirm their eligibility and schedule an individual interview. Interviews lasted 1.5 to 2.5 h, were audio recorded, and professionally transcribed. Interviews with sexual minority participants started with questions aiming to understand participants’ experiences as a sexual minority man, including experiences of discrimination and stigma, and the impact of such experiences on their psychological and HIV/STI-related behavioral health. Then, the interviewer solicited participants’ opinions and suggestions regarding mindfulness. Specifically, the interviewer inquired about participants’ impressions on mindfulness, led three mindfulness-based practices, and solicited their opinions on the potential utility of mindfulness to promote psychological and behavioral health of sexual minority men. The three mindfulness-based practices (exercises on focused attention, body scan, and self-compassion) lasted between 5 and 10 min each, and were each followed by a discussion about participants’ experience. Following these discussions, the interviewer provided a brief overview of the MBSR curriculum as a concrete example and sought feedback for
adaptation to address the mental and sexual health needs of sexual minority men. Phases 4 and 5 involved a preliminary analysis of participants’ input, followed by interviews with providers for further input and continued data analysis by the research team. We recruited providers via announcements made to staff at local community-based organizations as well as an academic mindfulness center. Interested individuals reviewed the study information and completed a brief online screening form, and they were later contacted by a study staff to schedule focus group participation. A total of three focus groups were conducted. Each focus group lasted between 3 and 3.5 h.
Focus groups with providers took place after completing the preliminary analysis of the interviews with sexual minority men participants. During these groups, we first presented the study rationale, led the same three mindfulness practices (exercises on focused attention, body scan, and self-compassion) for discussion, presented preliminary findings from our interviews with sexual minority men participants, and solicited feedback and suggestions for intervention development based on providers’ work experiences with LGBTQ + individuals. Phases 6–8 are currently ongoing and involve finalizing the intervention manual and pilot testing the intervention. The treatment manual, entitled “Mindfulness-Based Queer Resilience (MBQR)”, is derived from this process. data analyses We used thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006) to analyze the qualitative data. Three PhD-level psychologists with research and clinical experience working with LGBTQ + individuals and mindfulness performed coding and analytic procedures. We followed the six steps of thematic analysis, including (a) familiarizing ourselves with the data through repeated readings of transcripts; (b) lineby-line coding of transcripts to identify units of data that were descriptive and latent regarding the principles and techniques of mindfulness-based interventions for sexual minority men; (c) generating themes through reviewing, analyzing, and sorting of codes; (d) reviewing and refining themes; (e) defining and naming themes to capture the essence of each theme; and (f) producing the report via final analysis and writing. Pseudonyms were used to protect confidentiality. results The intervention development process described above yielded six mindfulness-based intervention principles and six key techniques and delivery considerations (Fig. 1). Principles represent guiding philosophies of the developed
1 3
intervention (Mindfulness-Based Queer Resilience; MBQR) for health promotion among sexual minority men, whereas techniques are specific practical delivery considerations in the application of MBQR with this population. intervention principles Principle 1. Minority Stress Reduction as a Key Theoretical guide Participants reported that various sources of minority stress play a key role in the mental and behavioral health of sexual minority men. Specifically, they described minority stress due to assumed heterosexuality and non-acceptance from family members, experiences of bullying and exclusion from peers due to sexual identity, as well as stress from within the LGBTQ + community (e.g., regarding one’s appearance), religious community, and the larger culture (e.g., heteronormativity). For instance, Oliver, a 22-year-old Black gay man, shared that he was excluded from family after coming out: “They were really disappointed. In the end most my close people, like my family and friends, it has been no good. Like there’s no need for me to be discriminated in attending family things or family meetings or interacting with some people. Like they get to cut me out. For me it’s very stressing actually.” Minority stress also manifests as microaggressions and social isolation. For example, Jack, a 21-year-old White
gay man, shared that he suffers from depression due to lack of male friends and peer support: “It’s hard to make male friends. I feel like they sometimes would say, like, ‘I don’t want you to be tracking me,’ or something like that. They think being gay means that I like every single guy around.”
Participants shared that experiences of discrimination, victimization, and stigma had a profound impact on their psychological, social, and behavioral health. One salient subtheme noted by participants was the internalization of stigma, which they noted contributed to feelings of loneliness, rejection, inferiority, and being “abnormal” when thinking about their sexual identity. Due to minority stress experiences both related to sexual orientation and gender norms (e.g., emotional suppression), sometimes starting in early life, participants noted emotion regulation difficulties, such that some participants described themselves as “super emotional” and some avoided emotions (e.g., “closed off”) as a coping mechanism. In general, avoidance as a form of coping was commonly mentioned, such as avoiding people or public settings, occupying oneself with activities to avoid thoughts related to identity, using sex or substances to avoid psychological pain, and avoiding medical care and HIV testing due to anxiety and anticipation of stigma from medical staff. Table 2 summarizes findings on minority stress sources and their impacts as mentioned by participants. As an individual-level intervention, MBQR is not designed to directly address distal stressors. However, it
1 3
could provide a safe and accepting space to facilitate reduction of proximal minority stress (e.g., internalized heterosexism) and disrupt the processes through which minority stress adversely impacts psychological and behavioral health. Participants vocalized the need for such tailoring: “the program should emphasize the community’s daily struggles” (Leo, 23-year-old Latino queer man), “make sure the program content is specific to LGBTQ + experience” (Michael, 25-year-old Black gay man), and “use mindfulness to cope with stress related to being a sexual minority” (Samuel, 27-year-old Native American gay man). Table 3 provides a brief outline of MBQR, the adapted MBI program for sexual minority men. Understanding and reducing minority stress and its adverse impact is integrated throughout the program. For instance, the “unpleasant event calendar” homework in MBSR is adapted to “minority stress event calendar” where participants explore their stress experiences related to being a sexual minority, as well as cognitive, emotional, bodily, and behavioral reactions. Principle 2. Affirming LGBTQ + Identity and Facilitating Healthy Identity Development
Due to common experiences of rejection, invalidation, and exclusion that result in feelings of inferiority and unworthiness, the second principle of MBQR is to affirm LGBTQ + identity and facilitate healthy identity development. Key attitudes of mindfulness such as acceptance and non-judging can be beneficial to combat identity negativity and promote self-love. For instance, participants noted that mindfulness is about “attending to your mental state” (Michael, 25-year-old Black gay man), “being in touch with yourself” (Ezra, 22-year-old Black gay man), and “appreciating who you are” (Dylan, 25-year-old White gay man). In particular, the curriculum of MBQR aims to enhance healthy sexual identity development on two levels.