Chronic social isolation (CSIS)–induced alternation in synaptic and mitochondrial function of specific brain regions is associated with major depressive disorder (MDD). Despite the wide number of available medications, treating MDD remains an important challenge. Although fluoxetine (Flx) is the most frequently prescribed antidepressant, its mode of action is still unknown. To delineate affected molecular pathways of depressive-like behavior and identify potential targets upon Flx treatment, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis of hippocampal purified synaptic terminals (synaptosomes) of rats exposed to six weeks of CSIS, an animal model of depression, and/or followed by Flx treatment (lasting three weeks of six-week CSIS) to explore synaptic protein profile changes. Results showed that Flx in controls mainly induced decreased expression of proteins involved in energy metabolism and the redox system. CSIS led to increased expression of proteins that mainly participate in Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (Camk2)-related neurotransmission, vesicle transport, and ubiquitination. Flx treatment of CSIS rats predominantly increased expression of proteins involved in synaptic vesicle trafficking (exocytosis and endocytosis), and energy metabolism (glycolytic and mitochondrial respiration). Overall, these Flx-regulated changes in synaptic and mitochondrial proteins of CSIS rats might be critical targets for new therapeutic development for the 1. conclusions The results showed that Flx treatment of control rats induced downregulation of proteins involved in mitochondrial energy processes (TCA cycle, ETC) and redox system enzymes. A comparison of CSIS and control rats showed upregulation of synaptosomal protein expression mainly participating in Camk2-related neurotransmission, vesicle transport, ubiquitination, and mitochondrial energy processes. Flx application to CSIS rats predominantly increases vesicle trafficking and mitochondrial bioenergetics, which might be the potential targets for therapeutic treatments in MDD. Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https: //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms232315351/s1, Table S1. Overlap of differentially expressed proteins between Flx-treated CSIS rats and following CSIS exposure; Table S2. Overlap of differentially expressed proteins between Flx-treated CSIS rats and Flx-treated Control rats; Figure S1. Full-length Western blot (WB) images represented in Figure 4 in controls + vehicle (Con), fluoxetine-treated controls (Con + Flx), chronic social isolation (CSIS) and fluoxetine-treated CSIS (CSIS + Flx) rats.