Despite the increase in awareness and support for mental health, college students’ mental health is reported to decline every year in many countries. Several interactive technologies for mental health have been proposed and are aiming to make therapeutic service more accessible, but most of them only provide one-way passive contents for their users, such as psycho-education, health monitoring, and clinical assessment. We present a robotic coach that not only delivers interactive positive psychology interventions but also provides other useful skills to build rapport with college students. Results from our on-campus housing deployment feasibility study showed that the robotic intervention showed significant association with increases in students’ psychological well-being, mood, and motivation to change. We further found that students’ personality traits were associated with the intervention outcomes as well as their working alliance with the robot and their satisfaction with the interventions. Also, students’ working alliance with the robot was shown to be associated with their pre-to-post change in motivation for better well-being. Analyses on students’ behavioral cues showed that several verbal and nonverbal behaviors were associated with the change in self-reported intervention outcomes. The qualitative analyses on the post-study interview suggest that the robotic coach’s companionship made a positive This paper or a similar version is not currently under review by a journal or conference. This paper is void of plagiarism or self-plagiarism as defined by the Committee on Publication Ethics and Springer Guidelines. B Sooyeon Jeong sooyeon6@mit.edu 1 MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Computer and Information Sciences College at Prince Sultan University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 3 Department of Communication at Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain 4 Estudis d’Informàtica, Multimèdia i Telecomunicacióat Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 1 conclusion Current interactive technologies for well-being, including chatbots, virtual agents, and conversational agents, offer limited opportunities to build rapport with users. The results from these well-being intervention technologies show mixed results, which hinder the ability to generalize their protocol. In this paper, we present a robotic positive psychology coach that can be deployed to on-campus dormitories and interact with college students to improve their well-being. In our deployment study, 35 college students lived with the robotic coach while completing seven positive psychology
sessions and had opportunities to build rapport with the robot through the intervention session as well as its other useful skills and proactive behavior throughout the day. We found that college students’ interactions with our robot were associated with their improved psychological well-being, mood, and readiness to change behavior for better well-being. We also present important and novel observations on how students’ personality traits, working alliance with the robot, and behaviors during the interaction are associated with the effectiveness of the robot intervention. Post-study interview data suggest that the robot’s companionship and proactive behavior were positively received by the students.