This research examines the extent to which parents of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) perceive support resources to be available, accessible, and/or effective in supporting their needs. A focus on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the availability and effectiveness of service delivery is included. A total of 35 parents in Ontario, Canada with a child aged 6–17 with ASD completed an online survey responding to questions about involvement in ASD services, use of formal and informal supports, important support needs, which needs were being met, and perceptions of unmet needs, all which were thematically analysed. The analysis demonstrates that parents experience multiple barriers in accessing supports, particularly from formal sources. Further, the barriers were heightened during the pandemic particularly in relation to the multiple role responsibilities that parents had to take on due to a discontinuity of support provision. Most of these parents put their own support needs aside to focus on their child, with the support their child receives directly relating to the ability to attend to their own needs. Parents identified challenges related to uncertain funding, limits of a one-size-fits-all model of support, and lengthy waitlists. Recommendations for family-centred care and the need for service coordinators to work with families to assist in navigating the complex support system are provided. conclusion The current study provides valuable contributions to an understudied population: parents
of children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) in Ontario. More specifically, this research contributes to an understanding of parental perceptions of social support and the influence of the Ontario service system on the ability to access support. The results suggest that parents experience multiple barriers while trying to access support, particularly from formal sources, which was heightened during the pandemic. This research places a strong emphasis on recognizing the multiple role responsibilities that parents maintain due to a discontinuity of support and the need to provide family-centred care. A main goal of the current study was to understand how parents perceive the role of support for themselves. An overwhelming majority of parents are putting their own support needs aside to focus on their child, with the support their child receives directly relating to the ability to attend to their own needs. Parents play a vital role in accessing services and treatments for their children. The current
study plays a role in highlighting the support needs of families across Ontario and reinforces that there are still gaps in relation to addressing these needs. This study illustrated the numerous families that access social support while demonstrating the distinct areas that parents are primarily concerned about, such as lengthy waitlists, age-based limitations on funding, and being solely responsible for navigating a confusing service system. While the current findings focus on the experiences of Ontarian parents, their support needs cannot be addressed without the government’s adherence to community engagement and the development of parent-professional relationships.