conclusions about the impact of COVID- 19. Comparison of the findings with prepandemic studies requires caution, as the observed status may be due to factors unrelated to the pandemic. Second, this study was only conducted in one province of China using a convenience sampling method, which is not representative of other regions, or of departments and other personnel in hospitals, meaning that these findings are not generalisable. Third, as 98.8% of the participants were female, more attention should be paid to male nurses in the future. Fourth, the difficulty of data collection during the pandemic may have led to possible bias in data interpretation. In addition, the scope of one questionnaire may not be sufficient to summarise nurses’ actual levels of burn- out, emotional labour and psychological resilience. Given the possibility of a ‘social desirability’ effect, nurses’ self- reported burn- out may be lower. Therefore, actual burn- out may be higher than the reported results, which would reduce the reliability of the results of this study. The response rate was relatively good, although approximately a quarter of the participants did not respond. As not responding may be a sign of burn- out, this study might have underestimated the prevalence of burn- out among the study population. conclusion This study was conducted during the COVID- 19 pandemic to investigate whether the pandemic impacted the psychological state of nurses in relation to burn- out, emotional labour and psychological resilience and to provide guidance for subsequent burn- out prevention and control efforts. Greater adoption of deep acting by nurses can be promoted by improving their psychological resilience, which can help improve emotional labour, thereby reducing burn- out and decreasing turnover rates. Senior management needs to pay attention to the psychological status of nurses. Therefore, qualitative, longitudinal and interventional studies should be conducted to explore the psychological condition of nurses, expand the research indexes of nurses’ psychological characteristics, construct models of nurses’ psychological resilience, and further track the long- term effects of interventions while evaluating the immediate effects of interventions.