Death by suicide is the seventh leading death cause worldwide. The recent advancement in Artificial Intelligence (AI), specifically AI applications in image and voice processing, has created a promising opportunity to revolutionize suicide risk assessment. Subsequently, we have witnessed fast-growing literature of research that applies AI to extract audiovisual non-verbal cues for mental illness assessment. However, the majority of the recent works focus on depression, despite the evident difference between depression symptoms and suicidal behavior non-verbal cues. In this paper, we review the recent works that study suicide ideation and suicide behavior detection through audiovisual feature analysis, mainly suicidal voice/speech acoustic features analysis and suicidal visual cues. Accordingly, there is a lack of large datasets that can be used to train machine leaning and deep learning models proven to be effective in other, similar tasks. 1. conclusions regarding audiovisual features and their relevance to specific suicidal markers, statistical insights have the potential to boost the training process of machine learning models by reducing the training time and increasing predictive performance. For example, this can be accomplished by leveraging the predictions of multiple different models trained on independent datasets from different clinical environments and aggregating them under a single modeling framework. Table 8 Audio-visual suicide assessment scheme
. 7. conclusion In this paper, we have reviewed the recent works that studied suicide ideation and suicidal behavior detection through audiovisual feature analysis, mainly suicidal voice/speech acoustic features analysis and suicidal visual cues. Audiovisual features have been proven to convey significant non-verbal cues that can be further interpreted to assess various mental disorders, however, the literature of audiovisual based suicide assessment is still relatively limited to a few small-scale experiments.