The next major evolutionary stage for voice assistants will be their capability to initiate interactions by themselves. However, to design proactive interactions, it is crucial to understand whether and when this behaviour is considered useful and how desirable it is perceived for different social contexts or ongoing activities. To investigate people’s perspectives on proactivity and appropriate Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. CUI 2022, July 26–28, 2022, Glasgow, United Kingdom © 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9739-1/22/07. . . $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/3543829.3543834 circumstances for it, we designed a set of storyboards depicting a variety of proactive actions in everyday situations and social settings and presented them to 15 participants in interactive interviews. Our findings suggest that, although many participants see benefits in agent proactivity, such as for urgent or critical issues, there are concerns about interference with social activities in multi-party settings, potential loss of agency, and intrusiveness. We discuss our implications for designing voice assistants with desirable proactive features. 1 conclusion and providing suggestions” (P13). Two participants indicated that, where possible, the agent should even help the user deal with stress, such as: “You don’t have to worry, I can help you
with that” (P8). Overall, the participants phrased their suggested initiations in a polite and calming manner, gently “building up” potentially distressing topics while keeping them goal-oriented and succinct. Interpretation. From these insights, we can conclude that in most situations, participants expected the agent to ask for permission before conversing. This is in line with results by Arias et al. [4] who suggested that the agent should make sure the users are willing to interact at the specific moment. This permission request could be communicated in various forms. Verbal cues would have high conversational fidelity in relation to human conversations, such as addressing the user by name (“Excuse me, Alex?”) or polite phrases (“May I interrupt?”) as we suggested in our previous work [31]. A more subtle approach could be non-verbal cues of different modalities, such as abstract audio or light indicators. Depending on the ongoing activity, the preferences of our participants differed. The cue should not distract people from their activity unless it is an urgent matter requiring a striking cue. Verbal cues were described as most distracting, followed by audible cues. Visual cues were described as the least distracting. Based on our findings, we propose an initiation process model for VAs to proactively approach users in non-urgent situations, as illustrated in Figure 4. It starts with an initial cue, where the agent indicates that it would like to speak. After user approval, the agent moves on with introducing the topic of intervention. If that is also approved by the user, the agent can proceed with the action. In urgent cases, for less sensitive topics or in single-user settings, the second step could be skipped or combined with the first. Although this model could help make certain proactive behaviours more acceptable, the configuration of and control over the types of proactive behaviours as outlined in the previous section must always come first when designing such systems. 5 limitations and futurework In this research, we investigated proactive VA behaviours in a home environment as one of the most predominant use cases for VAs through a selection of storyboards depicting everyday situations. Although the broader insights of this evaluation can be applied to other settings, futurework should investigate proactive VAs in other environments such as work and public environments. Moreover, the sample was skewed toward young (M = 27.86) and on average, more educated users, and therefore, may not be fully representative of possible VA users. This is particularly relevant when considering that in the scenarios, users with various demographics were present (e.g., the elderly person in the Health Risk scenario). In our study, we witnessed that individual personal differences can also be a decisive factor in terms of finding proactive VAs appropriate. The method applied in this investigation has its limitations and advantages. Since proactive VAs that have comparable capabilities to those illustrated in our storyboards are not yet available in the
market, we explored people’s opinions on these features by presenting hypothetical scenarios. We conducted interactive interviews involving various tasks on a digital whiteboard that engaged participants to contemplate about the presented design space from different angles. As our method requires the participants to immerse and speculate, it enables the investigation of interactions with future technologies that would be intricate or expensive to build. It further enables evaluating aspects of the system that would be impossible to simulate realistically, such as emergency situations or delicate private settings. However, since participants did not experience the situations and proactive behaviours themselves, their perceptions may not reflect real-world experience. Furthermore, it is important to note that some of the services presented in the storyboards may also be supported by other technologies and not solely VAs. In this study, we sought to explore what needs to be considered when developing such features for Voice Assistants. 6 conclusion This research explores desirable circumstances for proactive interventions by VAs in domestic settings. The findings of our scenariobased study show that people see great benefit in proactivity, specifically in cases of important reminders, time-saving interventions, or emergency support. However, great concerns such as privacy implications, potential loss of agency, and interference with social activities may inhibit the adoption of such systems. Based on the interpretation of our results, we believe that the desirability of proactive interactions depends on the following factors. Significance. The more urgent or critical the topic, the more appropriate it is for a VA to proactively intervene. The desirability is high under circumstances with a large scope or grave consequences. Social Context and Environment. Proactive VAs should accurately identify the environmental and social context including the presence of other users or guests, the closeness of their relationships, the type and sensitivity of the ongoing activity, and the time of the day. Agency and Control. The user needs to be able to adjust and configure proactive features including the times and topics for interventions. Users should have control over when the agent is allowed to listen and observe its environment, and when it is allowed to intervene so that they could anticipate such interactions. Individual User Factors.As there seem to be major differences between individuals in how certain interventions are perceived, proactive VAs should be able to consider individual user factors such as physical and cognitive abilities (e.g., of young children or elderly users), the current physical and emotional state (e.g., stress level, sadness, or fatigue), and the personality and preferences of the user (e.g., privacy needs or agency). Form of Execution.When initiating an interaction, the agent should generally first request permission using verbal or non-verbal cues, and announce the topic of intervention – unless it is timecritical as in an emergency. Furthermore, the intent should be phrased so that it is polite, not imposing, and does not create a feeling of unease, while at the same time being goal-oriented and concise. When users got used to certain interventions over time or gave permission, the VA may get right to the point. Altogether, as long as the proactivity dilemma is carefully considered by finding a positive balance with suggestions that are perceived as more helpful than invasive, there seems to be great potential in proactive VAs.