Schizophrenia is characterized by delusions, hallucinations, anhedonia and apathy, and is a chronic mental illness, which still has no cure. It is diagnosed in three main groups, namely positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and cognitive symptoms, and affects the patient in major areas of life, such as work, interpersonal relationships, or self-care. The usual treatment is carried out with the help of antipsychotic medications, which mainly target the positive symptoms of the illness, but have little effect on the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. It is a disease that affects 1% of the population, and while it is not the most common of other mental disorders, it can be the most disabling. Virtual reality (VR) is increasingly used as a powerful auxiliary tool in rehabilitation. It allows an immersive audiovisual environment with high clinical relevance and robust validity, modernizing rehabilitation interventions, leading to improved motor function and biomechanical or diagnostic ability better than traditional methods used to treat patients under cognitive health. In this context, this paper addresses the design of virtual environments and computer simulations, providing the patient with an experience close to the real world, and allowing intensive repetition of essential tasks during the mental health rehabilitation process, with real-time feedback in a controlled and 628 L. Deusdado, E. Freitas, C. Coelho, M. Morgado safe environment. Virtual reality (VR) is increasingly used as a powerful auxiliary tool in rehabilitation. 1 conclusion of all studies revised in this work, indicate that VR is a useful tool to evaluate and treat patients with schizophrenia. The reviewed studies covered three main areas: cognitive, social, and perceptual/sensory areas, classified into two main fields, namely evaluation of skills and symptoms (n = 27) and skill training (n = 6), as shown in Figure 1. 3 experimental design – vr This research will develop the VR environment by basically incorporating 3 key concepts that generate rehabilitative learning: repetition, feedback, and motivation. Since these factors are independent, when combined in an intelligent environment, they can achieve very promising goals. VR can promote better integration of cognitive and motor stimulation, contributing to more independent learning in everyday life, and can be very useful as a complement to existing therapies. Rehabilitation is comprised of interventions required when a person faces limitations in performing activities of daily living due to aging or due to acute or chronic pathologies, which may be manifested by difficulty in thinking, seeing, hearing, communicating, moving, interacting, or maintaining employment. Rehabilitation is an essential component of universal health coverage [25]. Mental health rehabilitation is a dynamic evidence-based model that provides comprehensive and continuous care plans focused on the person with severe and persistent psychiatric illnesses, closely linked to community integration and increased quality of life [26]. Mental health rehabilitation aims to help patients find a way to interact and function in society. Interaction with people and the experience of every day situations can contribute to this goal, thus allowing to control the experience in order to improve the effects of therapy. As a preparation and anticipation of some potential real-life circumstances during play, it is also the aim of this research to produce and test implementations of some VR scenarios, where the patient will be confronted with some simulated real-life condition, to be implemented in future activities. Some of these scenarios proposed to be developed are: 3.1 metro station scenery The first scenario we intend to implement is a metro ride: this scenario aims to reduce the symptoms of dialogue poverty and disorganized behavior. The idea in this scenario is that the patient communicates with other avatars present in the subway, while in progress with many people. In the virtual environment, the patient will appear at the entrance to the subway station, and there will be a small number of avatars, as shown in Figure 2. To start the simulation, the user will have to enter the subway, and can choose to be seated or standing. The moment the choice is made, the metro will start the trip, and you can alternate between sitting or standing during the trip. When starting the simulation, the user will travel in an ambiguous metro with only a few passengers, as we can see in Figure 3. The metro will stop at various stations from time to time, and whenever it reaches a stop, a number of passengers will get off and another will get on, but with the number of passengers increasing if there are no signs of stress and vice versa.  4 conclusion and future work As we mentioned earlier, there is a lot of evidence about how VR can improve the treatment of people with schizophrenia, showing that this tool has the potential to become an effective new way to treat symptoms. However, it is important to note that VR is only a complementary tool, which can integrate programs composed of other therapeutic approaches. This device gives the therapist not only a new tool, but also assigns an active role in prescribing and customizing the approach according to the user’s needs and the context of their daily life, as well as in terms of stimulus presentation, monitoring and adjusting the process according to a safe environment. The present document presents the study carried out for the development of both the scenarios and everything that involves their operation. In recent years there has been a breakthrough in research to alleviate the symptoms of schizophrenia using VR, however, more studies are clearly needed to establish the reliability and validity of VR-based assessments, and issues with access to these resources and ethics require attention, thought and research as the field develops. 