Cancer patients tend to have a high psychological burden. Half of cancer patients suffer from severe affective disorders and anxiety disorders, while one-third struggle with mild forms of these. The COVID-19 pandemic is damaging the mental health of the population due to social restrictions. A growing number of studies note the role of COVID-19 anxiety in the health and quality of life of cancer patients. The purpose of this study is to estimate the level of COVID-19 anxiety among oncology patients and to test the utility of the FCV-19S scale in a population study of cancer patients. The study included 600 respondents (300 oncology patients and 300 control subjects not undergoing oncological treatment). The FCV-19S scale and the GAD-7 scale were used in the study. The results were interpreted according to the following verbal scale: 76–100%, high anxiety; 56–75%, moderate anxiety; 26–55%, low COVID-19 anxiety; <25%, no COVID-19 anxiety. In the analysis of the GAD-7 questionnaire results, the mean score obtained was 8.21 (min. 0; max. 21; SD 5.32). For 81% of respondents in the group of oncology patients, the total score indicated the presence of anxiety symptoms with varying degrees of severity; in the control group, this proportion was 55% of respondents. The FCV-19S scale score as a percentage was 57.4% for oncology patients, indicating a moderate level of fear of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, and 30.3% for the control group, indicating a low level of fear of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. One-fifth of oncology patients were afraid of losing their lives due to the SARS-CoV-2 virus; in the control group, this proportion was 13% of respondents. Oncology patients were characterized by a higher prevalence of sleep disturbance than control group respondents, which was associated with greater anxiety. The study, therefore, shows that oncology patients have moderate levels of anxiety associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, and non-oncology patients show lower levels of anxiety. 1. conclusions of the study are particularly useful for medical nursing practice and present the need for further measures to prevent the development of psychiatric and psychosomatic disorders underpinned by anxiety, fear, stress, and trauma. Oncology patients, as a specific group of emergency patients, should receive psychosocial support in the form of psychological and psychotherapeutic consultations from the very beginning of their diagnostic and treatment path. Although the current study did not indicate high levels of anxiety measured with either tool, it is important to keep in mind any confounding factors mentioned in the study’s limitations. In addition, it must be emphasized that the epidemiological situation related to COVID-19 is still unclear, and it is unclear what mental health implications it will bring. 5. strengths and limitations The strength of the conducted study is the large group on which the questionnaire was conducted. In addition, the use of standardized tools and comparison of obtained results allowed for a better understanding of the nature of anxiety associated with the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection. The results of the study provide valuable information from both the theoretical and practical sides. Unfortunately, the study also failed to avoid errors, which should be emphasized. First of all, the questionnaire was conducted via the Internet (CAWI method), which, despite its widespread use, still arouses much controversy. Such an approach was dictated by the period of the study, i.e., the period of the highest number of COVID-19 infections in Poland. Such an approach can also be justified by the fact that the authors made every effort to
minimize the risk of bias—the study began with a pilot study, methods were used to avoid the phenomenon of “bot/fake responders”, and the study was coordinated by researchers experienced in contact with patients. It should also be noted at this point that the results of the study may have been influenced by various factors that were not considered during the planning of the study, but which may prove important to investigate in subsequent studies. Such factors include the type of cancer, length of treatment, duration of psychologist coverage, and selected socioeconomic issues. All of these are worth expanding on in future research projects. 6. conclusions Oncology patients have a moderate level of anxiety related to the presence of the COVID-19 pandemic. Non-oncology patients show a lower level of anxiety about COVID-19 (for the FCV-19S scale). According to the results of the GAD-7 questionnaire, in the study population, the group of people at risk of generalized anxiety syndrome mainly comprises oncology patients. Determination of the level of pandemic anxiety can contribute to the application of appropriate methods of assistance to people with moderate and high levels of anxiety. In addition, it is worth noting that there is a certain percentage of oncology patients who do not feel anxiety related to the epidemiological situation.