Background: Depression in pregnancy is prevalent, under-treated, and has serious impacts on the wellbeing of women and on child development. Internet programs can reach women who may not access traditional treatments due to distance, stigma or concern about taking medication. We adapted our online postnatal depression program, MumMoodBooster, for antenatal use. We aimed to trial feasibility, acceptability, and potential efficacy of the new Mum2BMoodBooster intervention with depressed pregnant women. Methods: Twenty-seven pregnant women with Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale score > 11 used the program in a feasibility trial. Twenty-one had current diagnoses of major or minor depression on the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM-IV. Assessment of symptoms occurred at screening/baseline, post-test (8 weeks post-enrollment), and at follow-up (3 months postpartum) using the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) and the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS-21). Results: In this feasibility trial, depression scores on both the PHQ-9 and the DASS-21, showed significant reductions representing large effects, with average symptom scores reduced by > 50%, and maintained in the ‘minimal or no depression’ range at 3 month follow-up. Anxiety scores also decreased significantly. Program usage was high with 74% of women visiting all six sessions. Program acceptability ratings were moderate to high. Conclusions: Findings paralleled the magnitude of symptom reductions seen in randomised trials of the postnatal MumMoodBooster program, suggesting that Mum2BMoodBooster is an effective treatment for depressed pregnant women. Effective internet therapies are likely to become increasingly important as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to make face-to-face access to health care problematic during ‘lockdowns’. conclusion In conclusion, in a feasibility trial of depressed pregnant women, the Mum2BMoodBooster program was found to be promising as an online CBT therapy for the alleviation of low mood in pregnancy, including those with a major depressive disorder. Outcomes were similar to those reported with the postnatal version of the program in RCTs, including good acceptability and adherence [16, 25, 26]. Like the postnatal version, this therapy was delivered in conjunction with weekly (approximately 30 min) supportive telephone calls from a coach. Finally, effective, accessible internet interventions for perinatal mental health difficulties are likely to be needed more than ever, Emerging evidence suggests that the advent of COVID-19 has led to a substantial increase in mental health difficulties among perinatal women [43]. Abbreviations CBT: Cognitive behavioural therapy; DASS-21: Depression Anxiety Stress Scales; DSM-IV: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV; EPDS: Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale; PHQ-9: Patient Heath Questionnaire; PTSD: Post-traumatic stress disorder; RCT : Randomised controlled trial; SCID-IV: Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM-IV. Acknowledgements We would like to thank all the mothers who took part in this research project, as well as their coaches, who offered them weekly support through the program, in particular Alana Greco, Holly Andrewes, Leigh Elliot, and Eliza Hartley. Thanks also to Christine Loft who assisted with post-birth follow ups. Programming adaptations were accomplished with assistance from Toan Tran at Tech4Research. We thank Ovia Health for enabling study recruitment
messages on their pregnancy app. Cartoons displayed in the Mum2BMoodBooster library and Partner Support Program were drawn by Bev Aisbett. 