Objectives: The aim was to investigate workplace bullying as a risk factor for five-year occurrence of long-term sickness absence (LTSA) in a representative cohort of employees in Germany. Methods: In the German Study on Mental Health at Work (S-MGA) (n = 2476), episodes of long-term sickness absence (LTSA) between baseline and follow-up were assessed in the follow-up interview. Workplace bullying was measured in the baseline interview using a hybrid approach, which combines the behavioural experience and self-labelling methods. Through binomial regressions, the association of baseline level of workplace bullying with first-episode LTSA during follow-up was estimated, adjusting for baseline age, gender, occupational level, smoking status and physical demands at work. Results: Severe bullying heightened the risk for LTSA by approximately 50% (Rate ratio—RR: 1.48, 95% Confidence interval—CI: 1.05; 2.19), while occasional bullying heightened the risk by 15% (RR: 1.15, CI: 0.85; 1.55). When excluding LTSA events occurring in the first 2 years, the associations between bullying and LTSA increased by approximately one third. Conclusions: Workplace bullying seems to be a risk factor for LTSA even when controlling for occupational level, smoking and physical demands at work and when taking possible reverse causality into account. We suggest to investigate effects of LTSA in more settings, to distinguish between occasional and severe bullying and employ longer follow-up intervals. 1. conclusions [52]. In addition, the relatively long follow-up we employed allowed us to take reverse causality into account [43,44]. Second, the prospective design reduced same method bias as data on workplace bullying were collected at the baseline interview, whereas data on LTSA between baseline and follow-up were collected at the follow-up interview. Third, the study did not comprise workers older than 60 years at baseline, which may have limited selection out of employment through unemployment or pensioning due to sickness absence [53]. The strengths of this study need to be balanced against its weaknesses. One is that a low response rate could have biased the results. However, based on a comparison between our sample and the population from which it was drawn, the bias due to regional characteristics, gender, age, education, profession and income was limited [28,54]. A second limitation is that the study does not cover employees younger than 30 years or those being civil servants or self-employed. Bullying may occur more often among younger workers according to previous evidence showing that it is more prevalent among employees in their 30′ies than among employees in their 50′ies [31]. As we are not able to assess if bullying is more or less prevalent among civil servants and self-employed, the potential impact that the lack of inclusion of these employees has on the present findings is unknown. A third limitation is that we do not have information regarding exposure to workplace bullying between baseline and follow-up, which would have supported a sounder understanding of the causal process linking bullying and sickness absence [55]. 4.2. comparison with earlier studies To our knowledge, four prospective studies have hitherto examined workplace bullying as risk factor for LTSA. In these studies, LTSA lasted 2 to 8 weeks, while follow-up intervals ranged from 1 to 7.3 years [21,23–25]. The associations we found in our study were similar to those observed in the only study that included a relatively long follow-up (mean 7.3 years) and considered also shorter LTSA spells (i.e., ≥2 weeks), which found a risk for overall workplace bullying of 1.28 that lies between our risk estimates of 1.15 and 1.48 [24]. Only one previous study, which also considered short-term sickness absence, distinguished between occasional and severe bullying and found, in line with our study, that severe bullying had a stronger effect on LTSA than occasional bullying [25]. The results of the other two studies, which did not distinguish between occasional and severe bullying, found risk estimates of 1.3 to 1.6 for LTSA lasting 2–3 weeks [21,23]. As these studies included shorter episodes of LTSA, their results are not comparable with those obtained in our study. In conclusion, there is a paucity of studies on workplace bullying and LTSA allowing us to place the findings of the present study in a broader international context. 4.3. conclusions The present study suggests that a reduction in workplace bullying could lead to a decrement in episodes of LTSA. As psychosocial factors seem to have an important effect on future cases of bullying [56–58], an improvement of the psychosocial working environment might contribute to a reduction of bullying. An improved psychosocial safety climate and more support of victims might also be instrumental in alleviating the health consequences of bullying, thus contributing to the prevention of LTSA [59–62]. Given the possible role of workplace bullying as risk factor for LTSA, it is recommended to further investigate this association in several occupational settings and countries, to look at episodes of sickness absence of longer duration and to employ longer follow-up periods, as well as to distinguish between occasional and severe bullying.