Self-directed behaviours (SDBs) are widely used as markers of emotional arousal in primates, and are commonly linked to negative arousal, or are used as indicators of stress or poor welfare. However, recent studies suggest that not all SDBs have the same function. Moreover, lateralisation in the production of these behaviours has been suggested to be associated with emotional processing. Hence, a better understanding of the production and the asymmetry of these displacement behaviours is needed in a wider range of species in order to confirm their reliability as indicators of emotional arousal. In the current study, we experimentally evaluated the production and asymmetry of SDBs in zoo-housed bonobos during two cognitive touchscreen tasks. Overall, nose wipes were most commonly observed, followed by gentle self-scratches, and rough self-scratches. The rates of nose wipes and rough self-scratches increased with incorrect responses, suggesting that these behaviours indicate arousal and possibly frustration. Rough self-scratching was additionally more directed towards the left hemispace after incorrect responses. In contrast, gentle self-scratching increased after correct responses in one study, possibly linking it with positive arousal. We also tested if left-handed bonobos showed greater behavioural reactivity towards incorrect responses, but found no evidence to confirm this hypothesis. Our results shed light on potential different mechanisms behind separate SDBs. We therefore provide nuance to the use of SDBs as indicator of emotional arousal in bonobos. 1. conclusions In conclusion, despite having a reputation for being less emotionally responsive than chimpanzees, bonobos also show higher rates of SDBs in response to emotional arousal. Whereas self-scratching appears the most common SDB in chimpanzees, the bonobos in this study most commonly performed nose wipes. The fact that nose wipes were so common among the bonobos, and are potentially indicative of low levels of arousal, could hint to a species-specific difference in emotional reactivity. Although more research is necessary to better comprehend these expressive patterns of SDBs and their reliability as indicators of emotional arousal in bonobos, we were able to provide evidence that some, but not all SDBs, increase with putative negative arousal, namely nose wiping and rough self-scratching. Arousal-related hemispace effects for rough self-scratching provide further reason to believe that this behaviour may indicate negative arousal. In contrast, we found that gentle self-scratching increased with possible positive arousal.