Purpose: Muscle dysmorphia is generally classified as a specific form of body dysmorphic disorder characterized by a pathological drive for muscularity and the preoccupation that one is too small or not sufficiently muscular. The major‐ ity of research on the condition has been conducted in cisgender men with a paucity of literature on gender minority people, a population that is at risk for muscle dysmorphia. One of the most widely used measures of muscle dysmor‐ phia symptoms, the Muscle Dysmorphic Disorder Inventory (MDDI), has not been psychometrically validated for use in gender minority samples, the aim of the present study. Methods: We evaluated the psychometric properties of the MDDI in a sample of 1031 gender‐expansive individu‐ als (gender minority people whose gender identity differs from that assumed for their sex assigned at birth and is not exclusively binary man or woman) aged 18–74 who were part of The PRIDE Study, a large‐scale, U.S., longitudinal cohort study. Results: Using a two‐step, split‐sample exploratory and confirmatory factor analytic approach, we found support for the original three‐factor structure of the measure. The subscales showed adequate internal consistency, and conver‐ gent validity was supported based on significant associations of the MDDI subscale scores with theoretically related scores on a widely used measure of disordered eating. Conclusions: These findings provided novel support for adequate psychometric properties of the MDDI in a sample of gender‐expansive individuals, facilitating the use of this measure in future research on muscle dysmorphia in this understudied and at‐risk population. conclusions and future directions In sum, this study supports the three-factor structure of the MDDI and the psychometric properties of the subscales in gender-expansive individuals. The support found for the MDDI in this study will facilitate its use in future research on muscle dysmorphia symptoms among gender-expansive individuals, who are at elevated risk for a variety of eating- and body image-related concerns. Abbreviations AI: Appearance intolerance; CFA: Confirmatory factor analysis; CI: Confidence interval; DFS: Drive for size; EDE‑Q: Eating Disorder Examination‑Questionnaire; EFA: Exploratory factor analysis; FI: Functional impairment; MDDI: Muscle dysmorphic disorder inventory; MI: Modification indices; PRIDE Study: Popula‑ tion research in identity and disparities for equality; RMSEA: Root mean square error of approximation; SRMR: Standardized root mean square residual; TLI: Tucker–Lewis index. Acknowledgements We thank Anthony Kung and Levi Cervantez for their editorial assistance. The PRIDE Study is a community‑engaged research project that serves and is made possible by LGBTQ+ community involvement at multiple points in the research process, including the dissemination of findings. We acknowledge the courage and dedication of The PRIDE Study participants for sharing their stories, the careful attention of the PRIDEnet Participant Advisory Committee (PAC) members for reviewing and improving every study application, and the enthusiastic engagement of the PRIDEnet Ambassadors and Community Partners for bringing thoughtful perspectives as well as promoting enrollment and disseminating findings. For more information, please visit https:// pride study. org/ pride net.