Understanding the epigenetic role of microRNAs (miRNAs) has been a critical development in the field of neuropsychiatry and in understanding their underlying pathophysiology. Abnormalities in miRNA expression are often seen as key to the pathogenesis of many stress-associated mental disorders, including major depressive disorder (MDD). Recent advances in omics biology have further contributed to this understanding and expanded the role of miRNAs in networking a diverse array of molecular pathways, which are essentially related to the stress adaptivity of a healthy brain. Studies have highlighted the role of many such miRNAs in causing maladaptive changes in the brain’s stress axis. One such miRNA is miR-218, which is debated as a critical candidate for increased stress susceptibility. miR-218 is expressed throughout the brain, notably in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex (PFC). It is expressed at various levels through life stages, as seen by adolescent and adult animal models. Until now, a minimal number of studies have been conducted on human subjects to understand its role in stress-related abnormalities in brain circuits. However, several studies, including animal and cell-culture models, have been used to understand the impact of miR-218 on stress response and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function. So far, expression changes in this miRNA have been found to regulate signaling pathways such as glucocorticoid signaling, serotonergic signaling, and glutamatergic signaling. Recently, the developmental role of miR-218 has generated interest, given its increasing expression from adolescence to adulthood and targeting the Netrin-1/DCC signaling pathway. Since miR-218 expression affects neuronal development and plasticity, it is expected that a change in miR-218 expression levels over the course of development may negatively impact the process and make individuals stress-susceptible in adulthood. In this review, we describe the role of miR-218 in stress-induced neuropsychiatric conditions with an emphasis on stress-related disorders. 1. conclusions Empirical st i s so far illustrate a formidable role for miR-218 in the central nervous syste . miR-218 has been associated with essent al sig aling pathways such as glucocorticoid signaling [32,33], ser tonergic signaling [107,108], glutamatergic signaling [29]. Thus, miR-218 regulation impacts stress response, HPA axis function, a d related brain functions. The N trin-1/DCC signali g pathway, along with the o rs, impacts neuronal development and synaptic plasti ity [31]. MiR-218 is expre s d throughout the brain, notably i the hippocampus and PFC [30]. It is expressed at various le els through life sta es as seen by adolescent and adult animal models, which again implicates its role in development [89]. With these findings considered, it is becoming increasingly clear that miR-218 plays a role in the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders, notably stressrelated disorders such as MDD [33]. One detail that needs to be addressed is how some studies ay have seemingly contradictory findings. For example, Dwivedi et al. found upregulated miR-218 expression in the mPFC of CORT-treated rats [32]. Meanwhile, TorresBerrio et al. found downregulated miR-218 expression in the mPFC of CSDS mice [28]. However, different models were used, which may explain the differences. Corticosterone injection is used to artificially activate glucocorticoid signaling, resulting in stress response, while CSDS allows for a more general stress response [109]. Additionally, these studies
Non-Coding RNA 2022, 8, 55 12 of 17
focused on different signaling pathways, GR signaling or Netrin-1/DCC signaling [110,111]. It is important to consider that the participation of miR-218 in various signaling pathways may have varied outcomes [112,113]. It is imperative to evaluate the causality of these interactions whether miR-218 dysregulation contributes to a dysregulated stress response or is a compensatory mechanism to an abnormal stress response. It would also be interesting to thoroughly evaluate how the effects of miR-218 expression change throughout an individual’s development. Since miR-218 expression affects neuronal development and plasticity, it is expected that miR-218 expression levels will change over the course of development. This concept has been broached using adolescent animal models. Torres-Berrio et al. reported an increase in miR-218 expression from adolescence to adulthood. While their studies found that increased miR-218 expression in adulthood would bolster stress resilience, they found that higher than usual, or “adult-like” levels in adolescence, would negatively impact development and make the animal stresssusceptible in adulthood [89]. The reports from Kim et al. and Choi et al. also demonstrate that modulation of miR-218 expression at various stages of life can impact the development of depressive phenotypes [107,108]. Alongside developmental-stage differences, it would be interesting to know whether dysregulation of miR-218 occurs parallelly or perhaps conversely in different brain regions [114]. MiRNAs may have specialized effects based on the brain region in which they are expressed. While studies have examined either the PFC or the hippocampus, it may be useful to have studies that examine changes in miRNA expression in both brain areas at the same time in the same animal model [115]. 8. future directions Currently, there are a limited number of studies reporting on the role of miR-218 in depression, and more research needs to be performed on the subject. Most studies thus far use animal models or cell culture [32,33,89,106]. Only a few studies have used human patient peripheral tissue or postmortem brain samples to validate the findings from animal models [28,31,106,116]. While postmortem tissue is not readily available, particularly in adolescent studies, peripheral tissue has the potential to serve as a suitable proxy. For example, Torres-Berrio et al. correlated the expression of miR-218 circulating in the blood with mPFC expression using animal models [28]. This process can be taken a step further by isolating brain-derived exosomes from patient blood samples. These small, extracellular signaling vesicles released from neurons in the brain for communication can more accurately reflect the levels of expression present in the central nervous system [117]. In this way, we can explore the viability of miR-218 as a biomarker for depression. For example, this miRNA represses the NF-kB signaling pathway and TNF receptor [97,118]. On the other hand, miRNA-218 inhibits type I interferon production and facilitates virus immune evasion via targeting RIG-I [102]. As mentioned above, miR218 overexpression increases glutamatergic synaptic transmission at both single-neuron and network levels and plays a key role in the regulation of AMPA-mediated excitatory transmission and the homeostatic regulation of synaptic plasticity [29]. These mechanisms could also contribute directly or indirectly to changing brain functions and behavior in various neuropsychiatric disorders. Since MDD and anxiety are more prevalent in females than males [119–121], future studies are needed in this direction. Non-Coding RNA 2022, 8, 55 13 of 17