Children and adolescents who survive the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) with an acquired brain injury (ABI) often demonstrate a variety of physical, cognitive, emotional/behavioral, and social sequelae termed post-intensive care syndrome (PICS). Social communication and interaction challenges have also been observed clinically, and there is growing literature documenting these occurrences in youth following ABI. The extent of these social changes varies among patients, and a subset of patients go on to exhibit social and behavioral profiles closely resembling those of autistic youth. We reviewed empirical research regarding social functioning in youth following ABI, as well as the overlap between individuals with ABI and autistic youth, published from January 2009 to August 2022 on PubMed and Scopus databases. Clinical case examples from a well-established post-PICU follow-up program are also provided to exemplify the complexity of this phenomenon. 1. conclusions and considerations Decreased social participation, poor social adjustment, and social cognitive deficits (including impairment in ToM) have been observed in a subset of youth with ABI, sometimes in the absence of cognitive and/or behavioral sequalae, suggesting that more mild presentations require ongoing monitoring and support for social functioning. Further, given the occurrence of social concerns following ABI and neuroimaging studies documenting neurophysiological differences in key social brain network regions, it makes sense that the behavioral profiles of some children with ABI mimic those of autistic children. Regarding whether or not it is appropriate to provide an ASD diagnosis following ABI remains up for debate. Some may argue that the etiology and developmental course of disability in ABI is so dissimilar from that of the life-long condition of ASD, particularly for those with ABI who experience late childhood- or adolescent-onset injuries, that they could not be considered under the same label. Others subscribe to the notion that ASD is, under our current diagnostic standards, a behaviorally defined disorder that in many ways disregards etiology whether it be due to injury, genetic abnormality, or idiopathic occurrence. A perspective in line with an RDoC framework [97] might de-emphasize labels altogether, identify areas of need, and recommend appropriate treatment that suits the presenting concerns. This might be a particularly salient approach because, as discussed in this review, social outcomes are influenced by a complex interplay between preinjury internal and external variables, as well as injury-specific factors (e.g., type and severity of injury). Additionally, the existing literature suggests, if indicated, appropriate intervention should be provided not only to the individual but to the family. In the end, the field must examine what benefit a label of ASD would provide to children with ABI in the context of our current medical system and for whom it may be appropriate. Would this label change the course of treatment or access to applicable, needed services? A handful of studies have described employing social skills interventions, such as those that are commonly geared toward autistic youth, for children following TBI [98,99]. Others have adopted applied behavior analysis (ABA) and behaviorally based interventions to help pediatric TBI patients adjust to home life after their injury [100]. Future research should explore these various perspectives and intervention approaches. What is clear is that, like ASD, ABI is characterized by significant neuropsychological and medical heterogeneity, such that changes in social, behavioral, cognitive, adaptive, and emotional functioning vary highly across individuals. Because of this, individualized and tailored assessment, monitoring, and intervention is required to ensure children and adolescents with ABI and their families are wholly supported from the time of initial injury through long-term recovery.