This study proposed an improved representation of the DASS-21 factor structure developed by Lovibond and Lovibond in Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 335–342 (1995) using bifactor exploratory structural equation modeling (bifactor ESEM). This research was conducted by reference to 521 Turkish adults (45.3% females; Mage = 27.86, SD = 8.23). The bifactor ESEM findings indicated a strong general factor of negative affect underlying responses to all DASS-21 items but also that despite the presence of three specific factors (depression, anxiety, and stress), the depression subscale explained a high degree of variance and could be considered to constitute a specific factor. The results obtained from this study show that there is a common factor associated with DASS-21 scales, the total score of DASS-21 can be identified as a measure of general negative affect, and the bifactor ESEM structure of DASS-21 ensures measurement invariance across genders. conclusions that have been reported in the literature regarding the factor structure of DASS-21. For example, Jovanović et al. (2019) showed that the bifactor ESEM is the best representation of the DASS-21 structure in the context of adolescents. Similarly, Gomez et al. (2020) noted that among the four alternative models that they tested, both the versions of ESEMs (ESEM and bifactor ESEM) fit better than both the first-order models (CFA and bifactor CFA). In addition, in the literature, sufficient fit values have been obtained with respect to the three-factor ICM-CFA model, as in this study (Gomez et al., 2020; Jovanović et al., 2019; Kyriazos et al., 2018). However, parallel to the findings of these studies, it was observed that the relationships among factors are quite high according to the ICM-CFA model, especially for the Anxiety and Stress factors (Gomez et al., 2020; Kyriazos et al., 2018; Moore et al., 2017). For this reason, it the fact that different models may need to be tested should be taken into consideration. As a result, lower correlations among factors were obtained in the ESEM. This finding is the same in the current study. Although the bifactor ESEM is the model with the best fit, various problems pertaining to factor loadings could be seen. It was concluded that the Anxiety and Stress factors in particular were insufficiently defined as specific factors. Some items associated with these factors exhibited negative and/or insignificant loading values on their respective factors. Moreover, it was observed that some items exhibited significant cross-loadings to other specific factors. However, among the specific factors, the most problematic results were obtained regarding the Stress factor. Additionally, Jovanović et al. (2019) reported the existence of substances that are insufficient for the Stress factor or that exhibit negative loadings on their own factors rather than specific factors. Johnson et al. (2016) determined that the Anxiety factor was poorly defined according to the factor loadings obtained via the ESEM. It has been observed that some items in this factor load significantly on the Depression or Stress factors. Additionally, in their study, the bifactor ESEM showed a slightly better fit than the ESEM; however, these researchers noted that this improvement was not sufficient to justify the loss of parsimony resulting from the use of former model. Similarly, Kyriazos et al. (2018) found that both the
1 3
bifactor models and the ESEMs were good but that the factor loadings were unacceptable. Gomez et al. (2020) found that there were no consistent results regarding the Anxiety and Stress factors. Therefore, both Kyriazos et al. (2018) and Gomez et al. (2020) preferred the three-factor ICM-CFA model in their studies. Vaughan et al. (2020) found that a bifactor representation exhibited the best fit to the data, and while some degree of misspecification was present, these errors were below predetermined cutoffs. Therefore, these authors continued their studies using this model. Similarly, Jovanović et al. (2019) conducted their study based on the bifactor ESEM, despite the misspecifications that occurred with respect to factor loadings. According to the bifactor ESEM used in this study, the results regarding the Depression factor show that the items in this factor exhibit high factor loadings on both general and special factors. In addition, similar to Jovanović et al. (2019), it was observed that the factor loadings on the general factor were higher for all items in this factor. However, Item 5 exhibited a lower loading than the criterion regarding the S-depression factor, similar to the findings of other studies (Gomez et al., 2020; Jovanović et al., 2019). By examining the cross-loadings, no factor loading higher than the criterion value was identified. For the Depression factor, similar findings have been reported by Gomez et al. (2020), Jovanovic et al. (2019), and Vaughan et al. (2020). In this study, according to the bifactor ESEM, it can be seen that some items associated with the Anxiety factor exhibit a high loading on the general factor but low loadings on their own factors. Similar results have been obtained in the literature for Items 9 and 15, which are included in this set of items (Jovanovic et al., 2019; Moore et al., 2017; Shaw et al., 2017). This situation may result from the fact that these two anxiety items have slightly different content than the remaining anxiety items in terms of reflecting the cognitive aspect of anxiety (Jovanović et al., 2019). In this study, the expected results for Items 2 and 20 were not observed. Although these items were positive and significant in the study of Jovanović et al. (2019), they are lower than 0.32. Similarly, Gomez et al. (2020) found that a satisfactory condition was not reached for Item 2 of the Anxiety factor. According to the results regarding the anxiety items, heterogeneity can be seen in this subscale. When the results of the bifactor ESEM in the Stress subscale are examined, it can be seen that the items included in this subscale exhibit high and positive loadings on the general factor (except Item 12), while the S-stress factor exhibits very low loadings. In addition, the ωhs of this factor is quite low, thus indicating that most of the variance in the stress items can be accounted for by the general factor. This result by Tully et al. (2009) is similar with respect to the tripartite factor structure, and the items related to
the Stress factor are defined in terms of the general factor. Similar results have been obtained from other studies that have shown that the S-stress factor is poorly defined (Gomez et al., 2020; Jovanovic et al., 2019). When the omega coefficients obtained from the bifactor ESEM are examined, a high value can be obtained for the general factor. The omega coefficients for the subscales are quite low. When the ECV values are examined, it can be seen that the effect of the general factor is high. Jovanović et al. (2019) concluded that most of the variance in DASS21 is explained by the general factor. Another piece of evidence collected with respect to the validity of the bifactor ESEM in the study is the measurement invariance test. It has been reported that the model ensures strict invariance across genders. Jovanović et al. (2019) also concluded in their study that the DASS-21 bifactor ESEM is invariant between males and females. In that study, the concurrent validity results for DASS-21 with the ASI-3 were also found to be good. Therefore, all results should also be taken into account, indicating a strong general dimension associated with DASS-21. This strong general dimension has also been highlighted by previous studies (Gomez et  al., 2020; Jovanović et al., 2019, Osman et al., 2012; Vaughan et al., 2020). In addition, it is striking that the items included in the scale exhibit significant and high cross-loading on other factors in the ESEM studies. Therefore, it is suggested that the items included in the scale are insufficiently defined with respect to the Anxiety and Stress factors. The fact that the Stress factor was not predicted during the development of the scale (Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995) may be the reason for these results. Previous studies have generally shown that the Depression factor has a well-defined construct, but the results are less clear regarding the Anxiety and Stress factors (Gomez et al., 2020; Oei et al., 2013; Osman et al., 2012). These factors (especially the Stress factor) appear to be closely related to general distress (Henry & Crawford, 2005). Additionally, items pertaining to the Stress factor measure both the Anxiety and Depression factors (Antony et al., 1998). However, Vaughan et al. (2020) reported that the bifactor ESEM worked very well for DASS-21. The reason why the bifactor ESEM did not work as well as expected in this study is likely the fact that the specific factors are not well defined. However, bifactor ESEM examinations can help identify substances that are problematic in three ways: (i) they lack significant and salient positive loading on the targeted factors, (ii) they do not load significantly on the targeted factors, or (iii) they load significantly and saliently on nontarget factors (Gomez et al., 2020, p. 13). However, considering all the results, it can be determined that the bifactor ESEM is suitable for DASS-21. 1 3 limitations This study faces certain limitations. The first such limitation is the study’s sample size. A validation sample can also be referenced when larger sample sizes are attained. Thus, the findings of this study can be verified. Another such limitation is the use of models based on a 3-factor structure in this study. Other models (1-factor, 2-factor, etc.) for DASS-21 in the literature can also be tested. The cutoff points in the model-fit indices referenced in this study are associated with CFA, but these cutoff points were also used in the bifactor ESEMs. However, these cutoff points may not be suitable for bifactor ESEMs. Additionally, because the data were obtained online, we were unable to control for other variables that tend to affect responses to an assessment instrument negatively. Another limitation of this study is the fact that modern measurement theories such as Rasch and IRT are not consulted. implications for future research and practice Very few studies have employed bifactor ESEM for adaptations of DASS-21 into other languages (Jovanović et al., 2019; Kyriazos et al., 2018). The structure of this scale, which has been adapted to many cultures, should be addressed by using bifactor ESEM in other cultures. A shorter version of the DASS scale featuring 9 items (DASS-9) is also available. The factor structure of this form of the scale can be revealed by a similar study focusing on Turkish culture. In addition, the measurement invariance of the scale can be tested with respect to other variables, such as age. Unlike in this study, the factor structure of the scale can be examined using similar psychometric analyses with respect to data collected from the clinical samples and/or other cultures. It is recommended that psychologists should consider the existence of a dominant general factor when interpreting the scores obtained through the use of this scale. For this reason, it is recommended that professionals who will use DASS-21 be more careful when scoring and interpreting the depression, anxiety, and stress sub-scales. Additionally, to explore the robustness of the findings of this study, these findings should be replicated by reference to other cross-cultural samples.