"The current study found a significant interaction effect of breast cancer stage and length of treatment delay on the general psychological health, such that longer treatment delay elevates participants’ psychological symptoms, especially for those at more advanced stages. However, our data are preliminary, as the study’s participants only consist of a subpopulation of breast cancer patients in China, whose post-COVID treatment experience may not be representative of the experience of breast cancer patients in different regions of China. What is more, the sample size for some of our subgroups (i.e., Stage IV breast cancer) are relatively small, which might have weakened the power of some of our analyses. A follow-up study could sample a larger number of breast cancer patients from various regions and religions to examine whether factors such as region-based differences and beliefs affect people’s psychological health. Additionally, research has shown that the median age of breast cancer onset for Asian women is 56 (Stapleton et al., 2018). However, a disproportionately large percentage of this study’s participants were 55 years or below. This might be due to the fact that the survey was administered online, and older people, in general, have worse eyesight and are less technologically adept than their younger counterparts. Thereby, although some people would be willing to participate in the study if it was administered in the paper format or through a phone call interview, they did not attempt the online survey because of technological challenges. Some other people might have attempted the survey but could not finish due to fatigue, difficulty concentrating, or poor eyesight. Future replication studies could address the limitations by administering the survey in different formats based on participants’ age and preferences. For people who have difficulties completing the survey online, a phone call survey could be offered as an alternative. Furthermore, some participants might face stressors in their lives that others do not. For example, in addition to their cancer diagnosis and COVID-related existential threat, some people may be impacted by additional stressors such as financial insecurity, loss of a loved one, or lack of support from their family members. Thus, some breast cancer patients’ elevated general psychopathology scores might not be the sole effect of their advanced stage or COVID-related treatment delay. A follow-up study could compare participants’ psychological symptoms at the peak of the pandemic with the baseline level when COVID ends and the stressors due to cancer delays are removed to examine the extent to which delay in treatment contributes to participants’ aggravated psychological symptoms."