The portion of the text mentioning future research directions is:

"Future qualitative studies should explore the reasons behind this poorer experience and how to address this issue. 4.1. futures directions The item bank and its CAT version provide a brief, accurate, and flexible assessment of the information experience of patients with SMI, suitable for research and clinical practice. The systematic and continuous collection of PREMs through a digital platform has great potential to inform quality improvement actions in mental health care. However, the CAT version requires an appropriate information technology (IT) infrastructure to collect data, at the hospital and/or at home, requiring that patients have internet access. 4.2. limitations Our sample size is large compared to traditional psychiatric studies, but may be limited in the field of psychometric studies. However, our sample size was sufficient, since sample size requirements recommend approximately 500 observations for accurate parameter estimates with multiparameter models (e.g., GPCM). In addition, the sample included a diverse patient population, both inpatient and outpatient, from several facilities in different geographic regions of the country. Future work with a larger and more diverse sample will allow for additional psychometric testing to develop a better understanding of the metric properties, but also to examine the generalizability of this item bank to other populations, such as patients with common mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders). Second, in this study, as in previous PREMIUM studies, we used the GPCM, which showed an adequate fit to the data and whose fit can be compared to the PCM because these are nested models. The graded response model (GRM), which tends to provide similar results, could have been an alternative (e.g., in case of non-convergence). Third, criterion validity could not be assessed because, to the best of our knowledge, no gold standard was available. In addition, given the cross-sectional study design, responsiveness could not be studied. Fourth, CAT precision depends on the quality of the related item bank, which showed the highest measurement precision in the [−2;2] range of theta values. Future studies should evaluate whether additional items are needed to cover the ends of the latent continuum. Fifth, we did not evaluate health literacy, which may have influenced information experience. Likewise, symptom severity was not measured using psychiatric scales (e.g., PANSS, MADRS, YMRS) due to diagnostic heterogeneity and different recruitment strategies that did not allow for hetero-assessment. By using the G