The conventional polar format algorithm (CPFA) is widely used for synthetic aperture radar (SAR) because of its simple and efficient operations. However, due to its wavefront curvature assumption, the CPFA’s depth-of-focus (DOF) is extremely small, which greatly limits the scene size, especially for high-resolution and highly squinted (HRHS) SAR. To solve this problem, an extended PFA (EPFA) is proposed in this study, re-deriving mapping functions by expanding the range history into slantand cross-range components according to the forms of real data storage. This allows the full use of storage data, which the CPFA cannot achieve due to the large approximations introduced by the projection of echo data onto the ground. The wavefront curvature error is then analyzed and eliminated using a space-variant phase compensation function. Due to the high accuracy of expansion in the slant range plane and the space-variant correction processing, the EPFA has a larger DOF than the CPFA. The EPFA is also more suitable for undulating terrains since it avoids the projection of real data onto the ground plane performed in the CPFA. Using comparative analyses of simulated data and real-world images, the results suggest that the proposed EPFA achieves better focusing effects than the CPFA and is particularly useful for HRHS SAR. 1.  In order to facilitate comparison, Figure 10b shows the focused result on the ground plane projected by the slant-plane image. The Hamming windows were also added in both cases. The results show that the processed image of the EPFA is comparatively better focused than the CPFA, particularly in the reflector area (see highlighted regions). Image entropy is used to quantitatively evaluate the imaging results of the real data in this paper. For SAR images, it is generally believed that the smaller the image entropy, the better the image focus [46]. In this experiment, the image entropy values, i.e., 2.66 and 2.37 corresponding to CPFA and EPFA, respectively, are computed to show the superiority of the proposed approach. The experimental results suggest that the proposed EPFA provides better focusing effects for HRHS SAR data than the conventional approach. 5. Conclusions Spatially variant distortions and defocusing effects caused by the wavefront curvature assumption in the CPFA become more pronounced in large scene images. To address this problem, the EPFA was developed for HRHS SAR images, adopting a new range model based on the 2-D Taylor series expansion and accounting for the wavefront curvature error. The 2-D interpolation function is derived in the slant-range plane, and the compensation filter is designed for the space-variant phase errors. In contrast to the CPFA performed in the ground plane, the EPFA is developed using a slant range and an azimuth position in the slant-range plane. The proposed approach has a much larger DOF than the CPFA because of the slant-range decomposition and space-variant correction procedures; the EPFA’s performance is also unaffected by the target height. The experimental results using simulated and real image data show that the proposed method performed well,
Figure 10. Experimental results. (a) CPFA; (b) EPFA. 5. conclusions Spatially variant distortions and defocusing effects caused by the wavefront curvature assumption in the CPFA become more pronounced in large scene images. To address this problem, the EPFA was developed for HRHS SAR images, adopting a new range model based on the 2-D Taylor series expansion and accounting for the wavefront curvature error. The 2-D interpolation function is derived in the slant-range plane, and the compensation filter is designed for the space-variant phase errors. In contrast to the CPFA performed in the ground plane, the EPFA is developed using a slant range and an azimuth position in the slant-range plane. The proposed approach has a much larger DOF than the CPFA because of the slant-range decomposition and space-variant correction procedures; the EPFA’s performance is also unaffected by the target height. The experimental results using simulated and real image data show that the proposed method performed well, achieving better focusing effects than the CPFA.