While the resources for English language are fairly sufficient to understand and analyze content on social media, similar resources in other languages, such as Arabic, are still immature. The main reason that the resources in Arabic are insufficient is that Arabic has many dialects in addition to the Modern Standard Arabic (MSA). Arabic speakers do not use the standard version (MSA) in their day-to-day communications and conversations; rather, they use dialectal versions. Unfortunately, social users transfer this phenomenon (i.e. language preference) into their use of digital social media platforms, which in turn has raised an urgent need for and challenges to building suitable datasets and AI models for different systems and applications. Existing machine translation systems designed for MSA fail to work well with Arabic dialects. In light of this, it is necessary to adapt to the informal nature of communication on online social networks (OSNs) by developing translation systems that can effectively handle the various dialects of Arabic. Unlike for MSA that shows advanced progress in translation systems, little effort has been exerted to utilize Arabic dialects for machine translation systems. While a few attempts have been made to build translation datasets for dialectal Arabic, they are domain dependent and are not OSN cultural language friendly. In this work, we attempt to alleviate these limitations by proposing an online social network-based multidialect Arabic dataset (OSN-MDAD) that is crafted by contextually translating English tweets into four Arabic dialects: Gulf, Yemeni, Iraqi, and Levantine/Shami. To perform the tweet translation, we followed our proposed guideline framework for content translation, which could be universally applicable for translation between foreign languages and local dialects. We validated the authenticity of our proposed OSN-MDAD dataset by developing neural machine translation (NMT) models for four Arabic dialects, one for each dialect. Transfer learning and Transformer’s architecture were adopted to build the four translation models. Our results have shown a superior performance of the Transformer-based models (F-score of BLUE and ROUGE ≥ 30 scores) compared to the performance of the sequence-to-sequence with attention mechanism (F-score of BLUE and ROUGE ≤ 13.1 scores) when training using OSN-MDAD dataset. We believe that our proposed dataset can serve as a benchmark Arabic multidialectal translation dataset for machine translation tasks, as the experimental results have shown. ar X iv :2 30 9. 12 13 7v 1 [ cs .C L ] 2 1 Se p 20 23 A PREPRINT SEPTEMBER 22, 2023 1 conclusion and future work Without a doubt, the informal and slang nature of conversations has become the dominant mode for communication on social media. Moreover, a variety of languages other than English are used in social talks and conversations. Accordingly, monitoring systems for online social behavior have to extend their ability to understand and analyze interactions expressed in different languages and even dialects. In response, we propose a framework that targets low-resource language (i.e., Arabic in this work). Considering the translation approach used to solve the multilingual challenges, we propose a translation dataset (OSN-MDAD) from English to multidialectal Arabic in an effort to contribute to the low-resource status [37] of multidialectal Arabic resources. Four different Arabic dialects were considered in this work: Gulf, Yemeni, Iraqi, and Levantine/Shami. OSN-MDAD dataset was then used for the purpose of building translation models -one for each dialect- from English to multidialectal Arabic optimized for OSN data. Our experimental results have illustrated the superior performance of our English-dialectal Arabic translations models trained using Transformer architecture -with transfer learning- compared to the performance yielded by the sequence-to-sequence with attention mechanism -from scratch-, using our proposed translation dataset. We believe that this study contributes to the research community by providing a high-quality benchmark Arabic multidialectal translation dataset that can be used by researchers to learn from and benchmark against and also extend upon in future related tasks. Another contribution of this work is the proposed guideline framework for constructing contextual translation datasets. Some of the instructions were customized to fit the purpose of this study; however, they could be customized to fit other problems of interest. The proposed guidelines were carefully studied, developed, and considered after rounds of expert consultations.