We argue that all building blocks of transformer models can be expressed with a single concept: combinatorial Hopf algebra. Transformer learning emerges as a result of the subtle interplay between the algebraic and coalgebraic operations of the combinatorial Hopf algebra. Viewed through this lens, the transformer model becomes a linear time-invariant system where the attention mechanism computes a generalized convolution transform and the residual stream serves as a unit impulse. Attention-only transformers then learn by enforcing an invariant between these two paths. We call this invariant Hopf coherence. Due to this, with a degree of poetic license, one could call combinatorial Hopf algebras ”tensors with a built-in loss function gradient”. This loss function gradient occurs within the single layers and no backward pass is needed. This is in stark contrast to automatic differentiation which happens across the whole graph and needs a explicit backward pass. This property is the result of the fact that combinatorial Hopf algebras have the surprising property of calculating eigenvalues by repeated squaring. 1 abstract We argue that all building blocks of transformer models can be expressed with a single concept: combinatorial Hopf algebra. Transformer learning emerges as a result of the subtle interplay between the algebraic and coalgebraic operations of the combinatorial Hopf algebra. Viewed through this lens, the transformer model becomes a linear time-invariant system where the attention mechanism computes a generalized convolution transform and the residual stream serves as a unit impulse. Attention-only transformers then learn by enforcing an invariant between these two paths. We call this invariant Hopf coherence. Due to this, with a degree of poetic license, one could call combinatorial Hopf algebras ”tensors with a built-in loss function gradient”. This loss function gradient occurs within the single layers and no backward pass is needed. This is in stark contrast to automatic differentiation which happens across the whole graph and needs a explicit backward pass. This property is the result of the fact that combinatorial Hopf algebras have the surprising property of calculating eigenvalues by repeated squaring. 2 conclusion and future work To summarize this paper, combinatorial Hopf algebras provides a rich algebraic infrastructure to interpret transformer models. This algebra has the surprising property of being able to calculate eigenvalues by repeated squaring. By interpreting transformers as Hopf algebras, we arrive at a new understanding of the transformer learning mechanism as enforcement of Hopf coherence. This mechanism boils down to enforcing coherence between the unit impulse path and the convolution path via Tannaka–Krein duality. As such, the transformer model can be understood as a linear time-invariant system.