Quadratic NURBS-based discretizations of the Galerkin method suffer from membrane locking when applied to Kirchhoff-Love shell formulations. Membrane locking causes not only smaller displacements than expected, but also large-amplitude spurious oscillations of the membrane forces. Continuous-assumed-strain (CAS) elements have been recently introduced to remove membrane locking in quadratic NURBS-based discretizations of linear plane curved Kirchhoff rods (Casquero et al., CMAME, 2022). In this work, we generalize CAS elements to vanquish membrane locking in quadratic NURBS-based discretizations of linear Kirchhoff-Love shells. CAS elements bilinearly interpolate the membrane strains at the four corners of each element. Thus, the assumed strains have C continuity across element boundaries. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, CAS elements are the first assumed-strain treatment to effectively overcome membrane locking in quadratic NURBSbased discretizations of Kirchhoff-Love shells while satisfying the following important characteristics for computational efficiency: (1) No additional degrees of freedom are added, (2) No additional systems of algebraic equations need to be solved, (3) No matrix multiplications or matrix inversions are needed to obtain the stiffness matrix, and (4) The nonzero pattern of the stiffness matrix is preserved. The benchmark problems show that CAS elements, using either 2 × 2 or 3 × 3 GaussLegendre quadrature points per element, are an effective locking treatment since this element type results in more accurate displacements for coarse meshes and excises the spurious oscillations of the membrane forces. The benchmark problems also show that CAS elements outperform stateof-the-art element types based on Lagrange polynomials equipped with either assumed-strain or reduced-integration locking treatments. 1. conclusions and future work In this work, linear Kirchhoff-Love shells are used to investigate how to effectively overcome membrane locking in quadratic NURBS-based discretizations of shells. We developed an interpolationbased assumed-strain treatment, named continuous-assumed-strain (CAS) elements, that vanquishes membrane locking by bilinearly interpolating the membrane strains at the four corners of each element. This locking treatment results in assumed strains with C0 continuity across element boundaries. The effects of membrane locking are not only smaller displacements than expected, but also large-amplitude spurious oscillations of membrane forces. The spurious oscillations of membrane forces can take place for fine meshes for which the displacement values are already accurate. Therefore, evaluating the efficacy of a locking treatment by only studying the accuracy of the displacements is not enough, the accuracy of the membrane forces needs to be studied as well. CAS elements, using either 2×2 or 3×3 Gauss-Legendre quadrature points per element, are an effective locking treatment since this element type results in more accurate displacements for coarse meshes
and gets rid of the spurious oscillations of the membrane forces. CAS elements are computationally efficient since the computational cost scarcely increases with respect to the locking-prone CS elements. In addition, CAS elements outperform state-of-the-art element types based on Lagrange polynomials equipped with either assumed-strain or reduced-integration locking treatments. 