Motivation: Relation extraction (RE) is a crucial process to deal with the amount of text published daily, e.g. to find missing associations in a database. RE is a text mining task for which the state-of-the-art approaches use bidirectional encoders, namely, BERT. However, state-of-the-art performance may be limited by the lack of efficient external knowledge injection approaches, with a larger impact in the biomedical area given the widespread usage and high quality of biomedical ontologies. This knowledge can propel these systems forward by aiding them in predicting more explainable biomedical associations. With this in mind, we developed K-RET, a novel, knowledgeable biomedical RE system that, for the first time, injects knowledge by handling different types of associations, multiple sources and where to apply it, and multi-token entities. Results: We tested K-RET on three independent and open-access corpora (DDI, BC5CDR, and PGR) using four biomedical ontologies handling different entities. K-RET improved state-of-the-art results by 2.68% on average, with the DDI Corpus yielding the most significant boost in performance, from 79.30% to 87.19% in F-measure, representing a P-value of 2:91 10 . The best-performing models for each dataset concerning baseline consid-
ering the majority label, baseline, targeted knowledge, contextual knowledge,
and contextual knowledge over ten runs. To facilitate table readability, we
results. The highest scores for each metric are presented in bold. D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bioinform atics/article/39/4/btad174/7108769 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 10 January 2024
First, by proving the utility of contextualizing tokens, with substantial improvements in one of the three datasets described above from targeted to contextual token usage. Second is the possibility of adding more than one knowledge source to cover the domains of all relevant entities mentioned in the training data. Third, by incorporating the option of adding knowledge to multi-token entities instead of only single token. We determined experimentally for the DDI Corpus the multi-token approach to be more thorough, which can be explained by those entities constituting the majority of biomedical entities described in the datasets used for testing. 5 conclusion This article proposed a new biomedical RE system, K-RET, that incorporates knowledge in the form of ontologies into BERT-based systems to enrich and complement the data used for training. KRET is a flexible system that can handle different associations, integrate knowledge from multiple sources, define where to apply the knowledge, and deal with multi-token entities. We used three independent and open-access RE datasets to test our system concerning different types of biomedical entities with different characteristics (i.e. label distribution). Allied with the three datasets, we used four knowledge bases to inject knowledge according to the type of entities involved in the candidate relations. The best-performing dataset was the DDI Corpus allied with the ChEBI knowledge base, with significant average improvements compared with the baseline in the order of 7.60% and 8.28% for F-measure and accuracy, respectively. For the BC5CDR Corpus, we also had modest improvements (an average of 1.39% and 1.35% for F-measure and accuracy), even though we did not find these results significant. Differently, for the PGR-crowd Corpus, there was no significant change in performance from the addition of knowledge. Thus, we concluded that the label distribution and relevant entity density within the training data significantly affect how our system performs. Nevertheless, we successfully demonstrated the power of adding external knowledge to training data and how to accommodate it to different domain data. In a nutshell, the K-RET system successfully added contextual knowledge, more than one knowledge source, and knowledge to multi-token entities. Supplementary data
Supplementary data is available at Bioinformatics online. Conflict of interest: None declared. Funding