Over a couple of decades, space junk has increased rapidly, which has caused significant threats to the LEO operation satellites. A mitigating measure should be taken to protect the LEO space environment. An Active Debris Removal (ADR) concept continuously evolves for space junk removal. One of the ADR methods is Space Robotics, whose function is to chase, capture and de-orbit the space junk. This paper presents the development of an on-ground space robotics facility in the TCS Research for on-orbit refueling and debris capture experiments. A Hardware-in-Loop Simulation (HILS) system will be used for integrated system development, testing, and demonstration. HILS is the most effective and vital system to test the on-orbit docking mechanism’s reliability, usability, and safety. The HiLS test facility of TCS Research Lab will use two Universal Robot(UR)5e and UR10 manipulators in which one manipulator is attached to the robotic-RG2 gripper, and the other is attached to a force-torque sensor named Hexa-E Onrobot and with a scaled mock-up satellite model. The first UR5 manipulator will be mounted on a 7-axis linear rail and contain the docking probe. First UR5 manipulator with the suitable gripper has to interface its control boxes. The grasping algorithm was run through the ROS interface line to demonstrate and validate the On-orbit and Debris removal operation. The manipulator will be mounted with LIDAR and a Real sense camera to visualize the mock-up model, find the target model’s pose and rotational velocity estimation, and a gripper that will move relative to the target model. The other manipulator has the UR10 control, providing rotational and random motion to the mock-up satellite, enabling a dynamic simulator fed by forcetorque data. The dynamic simulator is fed up with the orbit propagator model SGP4, which will provide the orbiting environment to the target model. For the simulation of the docking and grasping of the target model, a 7-axis linear rail of a 6-meter setup is still in the procurement process. Once reaching proximity, the grasping algorithm will be launched to capture the target model after reading the random motion of the mock-up satellite model. The HILS system proposed in this paper helps develop on-orbit servicing (OOS) like repairing, upgrading, transporting, rescuing technologies, on-orbit refueling, and berthing and debris removals. conclusion and future works that will be executed in the coming days by considering the multiple scenarios of space rendezvous and docking in a more real-time consideration. hybrid simulation method Figure 1 shows a snapshot of the PyBullet environment created to simulate the chaser-target space robot. A red target is being tracked by a Rotation Floating space robot15 with a UR5 manipulator on-board it. Three orthogonal reaction wheels are mounted on the space robot to control the attitude of the base satellite. The objective is to use a two-layered MPC-based control16 architecture that controls the motion of the satellite base and UR5 manipulator to enable it to reach the moving target. After that, the target will be grabbed using an impedance controller, followed by bringing the arm (with the target) back to the initial configuration. PyBullet simulations have been performed, and the results are shown later.  It was found that the UR10 is reaching the target point similar to the Pybullet trajectory path with slight deviation caused by the time latency, hardware friction, etc. Similar results are obtained for the target motion using the UR10 arm. Figure 15 shows the motion of the UR10 arm (solid lines) against the motion of the target obtained from PyBullet. These motions concern an intermediate frame attached to the base satellite in PyBullet. We intend to complete the PyBullet pipeline on the hardware-in-the-loop setup for the final results. For the same, we are developing a mock satellite model to act as the target. Force and torque sensors will be applied on the walls of the UR5 (chaser gripper), and the values will be recorded. These will help us design an impedance controller for the contact dynamics. Sah et. al. 9 37th Annual Small Satellite Conference conclusion & future work The paper presents the development process of the HiLS facility setup for the space robotics application. TCS Research, India’s first space robotics laboratory, has developed the space robotics lab to execute the proximity rendezvous and docking process. Numerous objective has been set up that will be implemented in the space robotics lab. A hybrid simulation approach has been utilized to emulate the micro-gravity environment on the ground with minimum cost. This approach has been promising because free base motion will be captured in a simulation environment like Pybullet, and the manipulators will mimic the chaser’s and target’s motion in hardware. UR5e and UR10 manipulators are used to replicate the motion of the chaser and target object. A 3U CubeSat mock-up model is made, which will be mounted on UR10 and provide the tumbling motion to it. The MPC controller extends the arm with the gripper as an end effector toward the target in the desired orientation. Once reaching the proximity, an on-off controller closes the gripper, followed by a PD controller, which brings the arm and the target to their initial orientation. The paper also presents the initial results of replicating the chaser and target motion by UR5 and UR10 manipulators. The results show that the motion of the UR5 and UR10 arms against the motion of the chaser and target obtained from the Pybullets are in the same trajectory line. In the later phase of the experiment, a confirmed case of the thrust characteristics20212223 obtained from the STK simulation2425 will be incorporated into the chaser manipulator to execute the rendezvous trajectory close to the target object by using the linear rail.