With the emergence of the digital economy, digital technologies—such as artificial intelligence (AI)—have provided new possibilities for the green development of enterprises. Green total factor productivity is a key indicator of green sustainable development. While traditional total factor productivity does not consider the constraints of natural resources and the environment, green total factor productivity remedies this deficiency by incorporating environmental protection indicators, such as pollutant emissions, into the accounting system. To further clarify the relationship between AI technology and corporate green total factor productivity, this study uses a two-way fixed effects model to examine the impact of AI technology on the corporate green total factor productivity of A-share listed companies in China from 2013 to 2020 while examining how corporate slack resources affect the relationship between the two. The results show that the AI application positively contributes to the green total factor productivity of enterprises. Meanwhile, firms’ absorbed, unabsorbed, and potential slack resources all positively moderate the positive impact of AI technology on firms’ green total factor productivity. This study offers a theoretical basis for a comprehensive understanding of digital technology and enterprises’ green development. It also contributes practical insights for the government to formulate relevant policies and for enterprises to use digital technology to attain green and sustainable development. 1. conclusions  5.1. discussion In the current digital economy era, and with the intensification of environmental pollution problems that accompany economic growth, much attention has been paid to the practical application of digital technologies to promote environmental protection, enhance resource utilization efficiency, and attain green and sustainable development [79]. As a typical example of emerging digital technologies, AI provides new opportunities for solving environmental protection problems and improving resource utilization efficiency. Some scholars found that AI enables firms to mitigate environmental pollution emissions and consequently promote their environmental performance [80], while others found that AI technologies assist firms in identifying and improving manufactured products and processes, thereby improving their resource utilization efficiency [81]. Existing studies have focused on the impact of AI technology on the efficiency of enterprise resource utilization or environmental protection issues, which is not conducive to a comprehensive understanding of the impact of digital technology on the environmental
and resource efficiency dimensions of enterprises. Because it is difficult to measure both productivity and environmental quality using a single indicator [82], this study selected GTFP, which differs from traditional total factor productivity in that it considers both the input and output of resources as well as the impact of environmental pollutant emissions, such as carbon dioxide [83]. Therefore, the choice of GTFP as an outcome variable for exploring the impact of AI technology on green sustainable development is conducive to fully revealing and understanding the integrated impact of digital technology on economic performance and the ecological environment. Currently, most existing studies on GTFP focus on the macro- and meso-levels; that is, they mostly focus on regional [84], urban [85], and industry GTFP [86]. Few studies have focused on micro level GTFP, meaning that few have focused on the GTFP of individual enterprises. In addition, China’s path toward balanced economic and environmental development has received worldwide attention in recent years [87], and it is imperative to explore the drivers of GTFP in the Chinese context. Therefore, this study analyzes the impact of AI technology on the GTFP of enterprises, which, on the one hand, compliments academic research on GTFP at the enterprise level and, on the other, reveals the driving logic of green sustainable development of Chinese enterprises in the digital economy, which may provide insights for enterprises in other countries or regions to attain green development. This study found that artificial intelligence is advantageous for increasing the green total factor productivity of businesses, which is crucial for attaining green and sustainable business development. The application of artificial intelligence can assist businesses in improving resource efficiency, controlling and reducing environmental pollution, fostering green industries, and promoting the use of renewable energy. Thus, it can increase the green total factor productivity of businesses in order to attain sustainable green development. When businesses encounter bottlenecks in sustainable green development, they can use AI technology to enhance the situation. To further increase the depth of the study, we selected corporate slack resources as the moderating variable from the perspective of behavioral theory. Based on the classification of slack resources in the existing literature [53], the moderating roles of absorbed, unabsorbed, and potential slack in the relationship between AI and corporate GTFP were explored. The boundaries of the relationship between the two were further expanded to enhance the practical value of this study and guide enterprises on how to apply enterprise resource conditions to enhance the contribution of digital technology to the sustainable development of enterprises. This study found that all three redundant resources are beneficial in promoting the role of AI in enhancing the green total factor productivity of firms. This provides confidence for firms to create redundant resources. Although redundant resources have been found to have adverse moderating effects in some aspects [88], they are highly beneficial and feasible for applying AI technologies to enhance the green sustainability of enterprises. This also provides the possibility for further research and the expansion of redundant resources. 5.2. conclusions As a key indicator for measuring sustainable green development, GTFP compensates for the shortcomings of traditional total factor productivity, which does not consider natural resources and environmental constraints, by incorporating environmental protection indicators such as pollutant emissions into the accounting system. Most previous studies have focused on regional GTFP [84], urban GTFP [85], and industry GTFP [86] as the research dimensions of green total factor productivity. This study focuses on green TFP at the firm level, completing the relevant research at the microlevel. At the same time, previous studies have shown that there is often a strong positive correlation between a company’s green practices and its performance [89]. Therefore, improving the green practice capability of enterprises is particularly important to enhance enterprise performance and achieve sustainable development. This study focuses on the relationship between AI technology
and GTFP, with a view to provide insights into new paths by which enterprises can use digital technology to pursue green and sustainable development. Using a two-way fixed effects model, this study selected A-share listed companies in China from 2013 to 2020 as the research sample to examine the impact of AI technology applications on enterprise total factor productivity. The results show that the application of AI technology has a positive impact on the GTFP of enterprises. By enhancing the level of AI technology application, enterprises can significantly improve their own GTFP level, which is also consistent with the claim of endogenous economic growth theory—that the application and advancement of innovative technology offers a solid guarantee for economic growth. These findings provide empirical insights for enterprises to further study and apply AI technologies. The theory of business behavior asserts that the role of slack resources in a firm is critical. This study investigates how absorbed, unabsorbed, and potential slack affect the relationship between AI technology applications and factor productivity, using slack resources as moderating variables. The results revealed that, first, absorbed slack resources positively moderated the relationship between AI technology application and enterprise GTFP, and the more absorbed slack resources an enterprise has, the more obvious the promotional effect of AI technology application on enterprise GTFP. This finding verifies the previous theoretical analysis that the more resources an enterprise absorbs, the more likely it is to focus on a specific strategic activity. Second, the higher the level of unabsorbed slack in an enterprise, the stronger the positive contribution of AI technology application to the GTFP of the enterprise. Unabsorbed slack resources are extremely mobile and can be easily invested in a company’s various technological activities. If a large amount of unabsorbed slack resources exists in an enterprise, it can provide solid resources for the application of AI technology, thus improving the enterprise’s GTFP. Third, the level of potential slack in enterprises can strengthen the positive impact of AI technology application on the GTFP of enterprises. Potential slack is the additional resources obtained by enterprises from the external environment through increasing debts, which provides good prerequisites for the application of AI technology by enterprises and better promotes them to enhance the GTFP of enterprises, which is also consistent with the results of previous theoretical analysis. 5.3. implications The study offers contributions at theoretical and practical levels. The theoretical contributions are as follows. First, this study further expands the
literature related to digital technology and enterprise green development and explores the impact of AI on enterprise green development as a typical digital technology, which contributes to exploring the driving factors of enterprise green development and provides theoretical evidence for enterprises to promote green development, with the support of digital technology. It also expands research on the outcome effects of AI technology applications. Second, rather than using a single indicator to measure the green development level of enterprises, this study applies the super-SBM model to comprehensively incorporate the input–output indicators related to the green development of enterprises and calculates the GTFP of enterprises, which enriches the measurement basis of their green development capability. Third, research on GTFP is mostly focused on the regional development level, which means that GTFP is studied from a macroscopic perspective, such as provinces, cities, and industries, but is rarely explored at the microscopic level. This study focuses on the relationship between AI and enterprise GTFP at an individual enterprise level, which broadens the understanding of the driving factors behind green total a microscopic perspective. Finally, this study focuses on the indirect effects of slack resources in enterprises, classifies slack resources into absorbed, unabsorbed, and potential slack, in accordance with existing criteria, and it investigates their moderating effects on AI and GTFP. The results revealed the applicability of different types of slack resources in the strategic development of enterprises and facilitating a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between digital technology and enterprise green development. The practical contributions are as follows. At the macro level, the research findings verify the accuracy of vigorous AI development, offer directional guidance for the policy formulation of relevant digital technology development, and provide reference to the management and guidance of the government and relevant departments regarding digitalization. At the micro level, the research findings point in the direction of development of AI technology and provide a reference for enterprises to promote GTFP and enhance green development capability. Simultaneously, research findings on slack resources also contribute to rational resource allocation for enterprises in order to adapt to their strategic development. 5.4. limitations and future research As the models, methods, and data involved in this study are limited, the findings may have limitations. 