Graphs in real-world applications are typically dynamic which undergo rapid changes in their topological structure over time by either adding or deleting edges or vertices. However, it is challenging to design algorithms capable of supporting updates efficiently on dynamic graphs. In this article, we devise a parallel fully dynamic labelling method to reflect rapid changes on graphs when answering shortest-path distance queries, a fundamental problem in graph theory. At its core, our solution accelerates query processing through a fully dynamic distance labelling of a limited size, which provides a good approximation to bound online searches on dynamic graphs. Our parallel fully dynamic labelling method leverages two sources of efficiency gains: landmark parallelism and anchor parallelism. Furthermore, it can handle both incremental and decremental updates efficiently using a unified search approach and a bounded repairing inference mechanism. We theoretically analyze the correctness, labelling minimality, and time complexity of our method, and also conduct extensive experiments to empirically verify its efficiency and scalability on 10 real-world large networks. 1 conclusion and future work In this article, we have proposed a novel parallel method for answering distance queries on dynamic graphs. Our proposed method exploits anchor parallelism by parallelising searches for multiple updates that can find affected vertices simultaneously. We have also introduced an efficient repairing mechanism based on the observation of boundary vertices, which can bound a search space to only affected vertices while repairing their labels. Our repairing mechanism uses a novel pruning strategy to further bound the search space of affected vertices for efficient maintenance of a highway cover distance labelling. We have analyzed the correctness and complexity of our method and showed that it preserves the labelling minimality. We have empirically verified the efficiency, scalability and robustness of our method on 10 real-world networks. Re-selection of highly central
landmarks could also be required after a certain amount of changes occurring on the topological structure of a dynamic network