The established efficacy of electronic volatile organic compound (VOC) detection technologies as diagnostic tools for noninvasive early detection of COVID-19 and related coronaviruses has been demonstrated from multiple studies using a variety of experimental and commercial electronic devices capable of detecting precise mixtures of VOC emissions in human breath. The activities of numerous global research teams, developing novel electronic-nose (e-nose) devices and diagnostic methods, have generated empirical laboratory and clinical trial test results based on the detection of different types of host VOC-biomarker metabolites from specific chemical classes. COVID-19specific volatile biomarkers are derived from disease-induced changes in host metabolic pathways by SARS-CoV-2 viral pathogenesis. The unique mechanisms proposed from recent researchers to explain how COVID-19 causes damage to multiple organ systems throughout the body are associated with unique symptom combinations, cytokine storms and physiological cascades that disrupt normal biochemical processes through gene dysregulation to generate disease-specific VOC metabolites targeted for e-nose detection. This paper reviewed recent methods and applications of e-nose and related VOC-detection devices for early, noninvasive diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infections. In addition, metabolomic (quantitative) COVID-19 disease-specific chemical biomarkers, consisting of host-derived VOCs identified from exhaled breath of patients, were summarized as possible sources of volatile metabolic biomarkers useful for confirming and supporting e-nose diagnoses. 1. conclusions Significant drawbacks of rRT-qPCR, the current laboratory gold standard for COVID19 diagnosis, limit its usage and utility to application settings providing slower or delayed results. Despite its relatively high reliability, this real-time quantitative PCR method may occasionally have a false detection rate up to 25% and a false positive rate of 2.3–6.9% [195]. These limitations include its semi-invasive approach and requirements for expensive special equipment and well-trained staff as well as delayed delivery of results. The need for diagnostic methods providing quicker results has demanded the development of cheaper, more versatile, and simpler noninvasive detection tests providing high accuracy in real time for high-throughput screening (HTS). The recent GC-MS InspectIR COVID-19 Breathalyzer technology approved by the FDA for COVID-19 detection provides rapid results, but it is very expensive, effectively limiting the number of units that may be purchased and deployed. The InspectIR system does provide quicker results than PCR but does not yield more accurate results than PCR. Recent testing of artificial e-nose and animalbased olfactory methods for early detection of COVID-19 infections in humans have been investigated as possible alternatives to fill part of this technological need. Studies [196–199] evaluating applications of trained dogs have been initiated to examine canine prescreening surveillance and monitoring of COVID-19 infections of humans in public places such as in airport terminals, shopping malls, people waiting in lines assembled to receive services (including COVID-19 testing stations), at sporting events, and other outdoor situations where individuals may be approached and quickly sniffed by trained canines (similar to drug surveillance) as a prescreening first line of defense. In these cases, dogs may be trained to detect differences in the smells of healthy vs. virus-infected individuals. Such individuals testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 infections may be given notifications on the spot by trained professionals (handling surveillance dogs) of their likely infection status and be requested to report to healthcare medical services or labs for infection confirmation. Alternatively, individuals could make use of available self-test kits. In a similar way, portable e-nose units potentially may be used directly in POCT situations by COVID-19 healthcare surveillance
Sensors 2023, 23, 2887 33 of 42
patrol personnel to detect infections in presymptomatic individuals. This would provide a means for early detections of the disease to help mitigate transmission of the virus, particularly in asymptomatic individuals, through timely notification of infection status of individuals in public places. Critical evaluations of COVID-19-specific epidemiological findings have suggested that the ability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to rapidly spread from individuals who are presymptomatic or asymptomatic and indicate that effective diagnoses and isolation of individuals based on symptoms alone are ineffective in preventing ongoing spread [200,201]. Consequently, the use of more frequent population screening tests to identify infectious presymptomatic or asymptomatic individuals is a more effective strategy to break viral transmission chains to suppress the growth dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic. Larremore et al. [202] modeled the effectiveness of repeated population COVID-19 screenings in relation to patterns of viral load kinetics by considering test sensitivities, frequency, and sample-to-answer reporting time. They demonstrated that the effectiveness of patient screening depends more on the frequency of testing and speed of reporting and that screening effectiveness is only marginally improved by high test sensitivity. They concluded that population screenings should prioritize accessibility, frequency, and rapid reporting time with only secondary emphasis on the analytical limits of COVID-19 detection. The use of simpler and cheaper e-nose devices to achieve more frequent real-time population screenings could be quite useful in supporting this improved COVID-19 disease suppression strategy. Other types of hybrid e-nose devices, not yet investigated for COVID-19 detection, also have the potential for providing effective VOC detection at lower temperatures than conventional MOS based e-noses. Conti et al. [203] developed TiO2 nanostructure sensors combined with different polymers including poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), polystyrene sulfonate, polypyrrole, and polystyrene sulfonate to produce nanocomposites casted with gold interdigitated electrodes. Shooshtari and Salehi [204] developed carbon nanotube– titanium dioxide hybrid nanowire sensors with improved sensitivity to identify VOC gases at room temperature. We herein summarized documented evidence and efficacy data to support a strong theoretical basis and logistical pathway by which electronic-nose and closely related VOCdetection technologies could be used for early, noninvasive detection of COVID-19 in pre-symptomatic human patients and in symptomless carriers of the disease who do not show any physical manifestations of the illness following viral infection. The many benefits of early COVID-19 detections to improve the efficiency of precision medicine, particularly using noninvasive methods, include reductions in transmission episodes, more effective regional epidemiological controls, increased options for more effective treatments, improved prognoses, and possibly reduced COVID-19-related mortality rates in all age classes, races, and ethnic groups [205]. Applications of e-nose devices for COVID-19 early detections are already possible with high accuracy and the additional use of VOC breath biomarkers to help further confirm and improve the confidence in e-nose based diagnoses. Researchers involved in COVID-19 diagnostics continue to examine and search for VOC target metabolites in exhaled air which are characteristic of the disease to improve the development of more effective electronic sensors and chemical detectors. Metabolomics is an evolving area of science that continues to change and improve as new technologies, analytical instruments, and associated methods are developed. Application of metabolomics in investigations of infectious disease diagnostics has been promoted by the urgency of the COVID-19 pandemic. Metabolomics approaches that rely on analysis of exhaled breath VOCs from COVID-19 patients hold promise for use in large-scale screening of human populations in point-of-care (POC) settings [22]. Determining which VOCs are ultimately most reliable as consistent chemical biomarkers of COVID-19 infections for patients with variable personal histories, health conditions, immune systems,
Sensors 2023, 23, 2887 34 of 42
and nutritional states would be most useful for improving COVID-19 diagnoses using e-nose devices. Author Contributions: Conceptualization by A.D.W. and L.B.F. ; Writing—original draft preparation by A.D.W. ; Review and editing by A.D.W. and L.B.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This project received no external funding, but available operating funds were provided from the USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.