Estimating the number of clusters and cluster structures in unlabeled, complex, and high-dimensional datasets (like images) is challenging for traditional clustering algorithms. In recent years, a matrix reordering-based algorithm called Visual Assessment of Tendency (VAT), and its variants have attracted many researchers from various domains to estimate the number of clusters and inherent cluster structure present in the data. However, these algorithms face significant challenges when dealing with image data as they fail to effectively capture the crucial features inherent in images. To overcome these limitations, we propose a deep-learningbased framework that enables the assessment of cluster structure in complex image datasets. Our approach utilizes a self-supervised deep neural network to generate representative embeddings for the data. These embeddings are then reduced to 2-dimension using t-distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding (t-SNE) and inputted into VAT based algorithms to estimate the underlying cluster structure. Importantly, our framework does not rely on any prior knowledge of the number of clusters. Our proposed approach demonstrates superior performance compared to state-ofthe-art VAT family algorithms and two other deep clustering algorithms on four benchmark image datasets, namely MNIST, FMNIST, CIFAR-10, and INTEL. The parameters for MMRS sampling are k′ = 15 for MNIST, FMNIST, and CIFAR10, and 10 for INTEL, number of samples, n: 4,000 for all datasets. Euclidean distance is utilized as the metric to generate the RDI for the t-SNE reduced embeddings of the MNIST dataset. Likewise, in the ablation study discussed in Section 4.4, Euclidean distance is employed to generate the RDI for the t-SNE reduced embeddings of the raw-flattened MNIST data. For all other experiments, cosine dissimilarity is utilized as the dissimilarity measure to generate the RDI. The input to all three VAT based methods is 2048- dimensional SimCLR embeddings as these methods transform the original data into a suitable embedding space/low dimensional space by virtue of their design. In KernelVAT, radial basis function (RBF) kernel is used, with the precision parameter (γ) set to 0.05. In FensiVAT, the down-space (reduced) dimension for random projection is chosen 100 when FensiVAT is applied to a 2048-dimensional SimCLR embedding.  DeepVAT minus SimCLR: We flatten each image in the dataset and apply t-SNE on top of them. Then we sample using MMRS and compute the final iVAT image for the samples. This will show that our model not only benefits from the t-SNE block. 2. DeepVAT minus t-SNE: Images are passed through a trained SimCLR encoder, and we sample the learned high-dimensional embeddings using MMRS. The final iVAT image is computed on the sampled embeddings. 3. DeepVAT minus MMRS: iVAT image is computed on full set of embeddings. However, as iVAT/VAT family algorithms require computation of dissimilarity matrix, which has a time complexity of order O(N2), it will take hours to get the results. Hence, due to such large time complexity and resource constraint, we are not reporting the results of this ablation. 4. DeepVAT minus tSNE minus SimCLR: We apply iVAT directly on the MMRS sub-set of raw flattened images. The findings of the ablation study (1) (Table 3) suggest that the generation of RDI by DeepVAT is not solely reliant on t-SNE. Although t-SNE applied directly to raw flattened images produces reasonably good results, it is not as accurate as DeepVAT. However, when dealing with complex datasets like CIFAR-10, utilizing t-SNE on raw flattened images fails to provide meaningful information about
the cluster structure. Additionally, the role of the SimCLR module in DeepVAT is investigated in the study (2). The results in Table 3 indicate that SimCLR alone does not yield satisfactory outcomes, although it still demonstrates limited interpretability for simple datasets like MNIST and FMNIST. Nevertheless, when iVAT is applied to SimCLR embeddings for complex datasets, it fails to convey meaningful results. This limitation may be attributed to the high dimensionality of the SimCLR embeddings (2048), which hinders the accurate inference of cluster presence by iVAT. 5. conclusions and future work This article proposes a deep, self-supervised learning based VAT framework, DeepVAT, for cluster structure assessment in image data. The self-supervised learning method SimCLR significantly improved the performance of iVAT both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our experimental results suggest that when t-SNE is used as dimensionality reduction on top of SimCLR embeddings, the iVAT yields a much sharper RDI, thus a more accurate estimate of the number of clusters. This is because SimCLR can capture the intrinsic dimensionality of image datasets which helped t-SNE in generating a good low dimensional representation. Based on our numerical experiments on four image datasets, we have also shown that DeepVAT significantly outperformed other VAT family methods (FensiVAT, KernelVAT and SpecVAT) and two deep clustering methods (DEC and LSD-C) based on clustering partition accuracy (PA) and NMI. We believe that deploying more deep learning based models like deep metric learning and semisupervised, which have partial access to labels can further improve the iVAT image for complex datasets.