In this paper, we present a deterministic mathematical model for the study of overweight, and obesity in a population and its impact on the growth of the number of diabetics. For the construction of the model, we take into account social factors and the interactions between the elements of society. We find the basic reproduction number and prove the global stability of the disease-free equilibrium point. We present theoretical results and find the sensitivity indices to characterize the impact of parameters associated with overweight, obesity and diagnosed diabetes on the basic reproduction number. To validate the model, we perform computational simulations and study the basic reproduction number and compartments. We present the behavior of the compartments for a scenario and study the impact of the variation of parameters associated with overweight by social pressure and diabetes due to causes other than obesity. Table 4 shows the cumulative number of cases by compartment for the different β1 at the end of the study. We show that despite the differences not being significant, the number of individuals with normal-weight decreases and those who are overweight, obese and diabetic increase as β1 increases. When we vary α1, we have that in the compartment of individuals with
normal-weight, we have that initially the lower α1 values report a higher number of individuals with that weight, then decreases starting to decrease for the lower α1 values and at the end of the study the higher α1 values report a higher number of cases but without a significant difference. It is important to highlight the initial behavior for the values of α1 = 0.7 (highest of the values studied) that has a decrease unlike the behavior of the other values of α1 studied (see Figure 6a). These results may provide information to reduce the impact of diabetes in the population, since hereditary, racial and genetic factors also greatly influence the reporting of new cases of diabetes. In the case of diabetics, it is important to highlight that the asymptotic
Math. Model. Anal., 28(4):611–635, 2023.
behavior changes at the beginning of the study, for higher values we have a convex behavior and for the lower ones slightly concave, and for higher than α1 a lower number of diabetic cases are reported at the beginning. After 5 years of study, the behavior of diabetics tends to increase the number of cases (see Figure 6d). In the case of the overweight, the behavior tends to grow and then stabilizes, reporting a greater number of overweight cases for values less than α1. In the obese initially we see a decrease and then we have a growth behavior, where for values less than α1 the number of reported cases with obesity is greater. Table 5 shows the values reported by each compartment for the different values of α1. In this case we have that for values greater than α1 the number of cases with normal-weight is greater, the number of overweight and obese is reduced and the number of diabetes increases significantly. We can conclude that both diagnosis of diabetes and the influence of social pressure on overweight and obesity have an influence on the dynamic. We must take into account that the behavior for the different values of α1 was more significant in the compartments. To achieve a control strategy with the aim of reducing diabetes in the population, we recommend paying attention to parameter α1, because we show that factors other than obesity can report significant numbers of diabetics. 5 conclusions In this paper, we presented a mathematical model to study obesity and overweight and their relationship with diabetes. The model allows to study the behavior of normal-weight, overweight and obese individuals and their interactions and the influence of social factors (social pressure). Using the next generation matrix method we found the basic reproduction number and showed the global stability of the disease-free equilibrium point. We calculated the sensitivity indices with respect to the basic reproduction number for the parameters associated with the transition between the normal-weight, overweight and obese compartments and those associated with diabetes. We presented theoretical results to characterize the joint variation of these parameters and identified the sign of the sensitivity index on ℜ0. To validate the model, we performed computational simulations with data from the literature and other
assumed data validated by specialists. We checked the theoretical results and found that the parameter associated with the transition from overweight to obese has a positive sensitivity index, which means that a growth in this parameter causes a growth in ℜ0. In the study of the compartments, we found that the normal-weight compartment has a significant decrease and the overweight, obese and diabetic compartments have an increase. These results show the need for a control strategy to control obesity and consequently diabetes. We studied the impact on the dynamics of the parameters β1 and α1 and found that the parameter α1 gives a volatile behavior to the compartments of individuals with normal weight and its variation causes a more significant effect on the compartments compared to the variation of β1. In particular, the growth of parameter α1 will increase the number of diabetic cases. Thus, factors other than obesity and overweight also have an impact on the number of diabetic cases. In our work, we limit ourselves to the study of the negative impact of overweight and obesity on people of normal weight and define the transmission rate. We must take into account that the opposite effect (i.e., those of normal weight may contribute to help the obese and overweight) may also have an influence but this is not the current focus of our work. To obtain some parameters such as those related to transitions, development of diabetes and the influence of social factors on overweight require population-based studies. These results provide information for the construction of a control strategy with the aim of reducing obesity and overweight and diabetes.