A core endeavour in current affective computing and social signal processing research is the construction of datasets embedding suitable ground truths to foster machine learning methods. This practice brings up hitherto overlooked intricacies. In this paper, we consider causal factors potentially arising when human raters evaluate the affect fluctuations of subjects involved in dyadic interactions and subsequently categorise them in terms of social participation traits. To gauge such factors, we propose an emulator as a statistical approximation of the human rater, and we first discuss the motivations and the rationale behind the approach.The emulator is laid down in the next section as a phenomenological model where the core affect stochastic dynamics as perceived by the rater are captured through an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process; its parameters are then exploited to infer potential causal effects in the attribution of social traits. Following that, by resorting to a publicly available dataset, the adequacy of the model is evaluated in terms of both human raters’ emulation and machine learning predictive capabilities. We then present the results, which are followed by a general discussion concerning findings and their implications, together with advantages and potential applications of the approach. 1. conclusions In this study, we have addressed a hitherto neglected problem. We have considered the typical scenario where raters are recruited to label (in continuous or discrete form) observed subjects in terms of their exhibited affective/social behavioural cues; in the case considered here, the rater is attributing both affective and social participation labels to the behaviour of subjects involved in an experiment concerning dyadic interactions under a given task. In spite of its widespread use in affective computing for constructing datasets, this setting most often conceals the occurrence of complex interactions between the rater, the subjects and the situational cues. As a matter of fact, the ground truth eventually achieved might be best conceived as the result of fragile equilibrium floating between many such factors, rather than the barely “objective” measure usually surmised. Thus, the results produced on its basis should be cautiously handled. Neglecting these issues can impinge on the internal validity of the underlying study and subsequent machine learning analyses. To shed light on such complex interactions, we have proposed a novel model, a human rater emulator that relies upon a phenomenological representation of the core affect (the OU state-space model) coupled with a causal trait-based attribution of social attitudes. As related to the specific research questions addressed in this work, the analyses conducted on the publicly available RECOLA corpus and results so far achieved allow for the following conclusions:
1. The core affect dynamics generated by the emulator is consistent with the participant’s affect dynamics as perceived by the human rater; 2. The phenomenological model behind the emulator overall reliably captures salient causal aspects concerning the relationship between core affect and interpersonal behaviour involved in social judgement; 3. The emulator in its present form, when straightforwardly embedded as a component of the machine learning pipeline, exhibits an interesting performance trend that is in line with the theoretical expectations, namely that a causal-based model should perform better than a correlational one in dealing with out-of-sample data. The difference in performance, however, that we have reported with the limited out-of-sample test set available does not allow for a conclusive statement in this regard, at least in terms of classical statistical significance. 