Recent research indicates that most post-secondary students in North America “felt overwhelming anxiety” in the past few years, negatively affecting well-being and academic performance. Further research revealed that other emotions, biases, perceptions, and negative thoughts, can similarly affect student academic performance. To address this problem, we classify these counterproductive mindsets, including anxiety, into Scarcity Mindset, a self-limiting perspective that appropriates cognitive bandwidth required for essential processes like learning in favour of addressing more critical needs or perceived insufficiencies. Through a multi-disciplinary literature analysis of ideas in cognitive science, learning theories and mindsets, and current technology approaches that are suited to address the limitations of scarcity thinking, we identify strategies to help transition students to a more positive Abundance Mindsets. We demonstrate that these priming intervention strategies can transfer to leading edge digital environments, particularly Virtual Reality (VR). Offering further insights into the findings of our two previously presented studies, we argue that priming interventions related to preparatory activities and the context priming are transferable to virtual reality environments. As such, building on our multidisciplinary research insights, we propose a comprehensive priming model that exploits priming techniques in an iterative process called Cyclical Priming Methodology (CPM). These intervention strategies can focus on student preparation, motivation, reflection, the context of the learning environment, and other aspects of the learning process. Building on CPM, we further propose a technology implementation within VR called Virtual Reality Experience Priming (VREP) and discuss the process to embed CPM/VREP activities within the Experiential Learning Theory (ELT) cycle. 1. conclusion Our research was motivated to find technology solutions to minimize the impact of scarcity thinking (anxiety, negative biases, stereotypes, and negative mindsets): a counterproductive mindset that diverts precious cognitive resources needed for important activities like learning. Through the lens of Scarcity Mindset, we conducted a multidisciplinary literature analysis of innovative ideas in cognitive science, learning theories and mindsets, and technology approaches suited to address the challenges of scarcity thinking. We identified priming strategies that help transition students to a more positive mental mindset. Based on this initial priming research model, we reviewed two past studies based on preparatory experience priming (PEP for gaming and meditation) and contextoriented priming (COP for situated learning environments). In our post study reflection, we proposed a comprehensive theoretical priming framework called Cyclical Priming Methodology to be applied within the ELT Cycle and a VR implementation of CPM called VREP that proposes priming interventions throughout this experiential learning cycle. We discussed various forms of priming that can be
supported by CPM/VREP. Further research is required to investigate the effectiveness of the model and suggested interventions and to explore other forms of priming that can be added. Additional research questions for future research are:
▪ Who are the most sensitive or suitable to the priming interventions? ▪ What subject matter content is most sensitive and favourable to these priming techniques? ▪ Where are these priming techniques best applied (e.g., nature environments, creative environments,
historical settings, specific geographies, or landmarks that evoke emotional responses)? ▪ When is “prime time”? How would we apply these various methods within the ELT cycle? Can we have
priming during and after the main task? How frequently should priming be applied?