conclusions for 2% of the labeled data. For cars, our DDS3D achieves similar performance to 3DIoUMatch. The reason behind is that the detector on the category of the car has already achieved satisfactory results in the pre-training stage, which is difficult to improve by pseudo-labels in the semi-supervised framework. c. ablation study We present ablation studies with 1% labeled data to analyze the effectiveness of our proposed components in DDS3D the ablation of the improvement of each component on the  learning, fixed threshold, dynamic threshold and dense  pedestrian and cyclist. on KITTI [5] val split. Table II summarizes the ablation results on our dense pseudo-label generation mode (DPLG) and dynamic threshold module (DT). We adopt the labeleddata-only PV-RCNN as the baseline (Exp (a) of Table II). To validating the effectiveness of the dynamic threshold filter, we add a fixed threshold (FT) manner as a comparison. SSL stands for paradigm using semi-supervised learning. Effect of dense pseudo label generation module. Compared with the naive pseudo-label baseline with a fixed threshold (Exp (c) of Table II), our dense pseudo-label generation (Exp (e) of Table II) achieves 0.4%, 1.1% and 1.4% mAP on car, pedestrian and cyclist, respectively. The main reason is that some boxes with high IoU with GT but low scores are filtered out by NMS as redundant boxes. Our dense pseudo-label generation mode can effectively deal with this case. Effect of dynamic threshold. For a fair comparison, we extensively search for the fixed confidence threshold, as shown in Table III. It is worth noting that different optimal thresholds might be required for different object classes. To reduce the number of hyperparameters, we use the same threshold to filter all categories. As shown in Table III, setting the fixed threshold to 0.4 is a reliable choice. Thus, we choose the value of 0.4 as the fixed threshold Table II. Compared with our baseline with the fixed threshold Table II (exp (c)), our dynamic threshold strategy shown in Table II (exp (d)) achieves 0.4% mAP improvement on cars and 0.9% mAP improvement on pedestrians. Moreover, our dynamic threshold strategy with dense pseudo label generation brings a significant improvement to the fixed threshold, which achieves 0.4% mAP improvement on pedestrians and 2.5% mAP improvement on cyclists. The naive pseudo-label baseline proves that directly using teachers’ proposals as pseudo-labels to supervise the student model gets low-performance improvement. On the other hand, it is proven that supervision with high quality and sufficient pseudo-labels is necessary. Therefore, it demonstrates the effectiveness of our dynamic threshold and more details will be discussed in later sections. Effect of different threshold strategies Table IV shows the performance of our dynamic threshold strategy under different settings, and all experiments are trained for 60 the ablation of the fixed and dynamic threshold. the ablation of the range of the dynamic threshold (dt). epochs with steps as 500. We design some different start and end of the dynamic threshold strategy and different threshold trends: high-to-low (our dynamic strategy) and low-to-high. According to the result, our dynamic threshold strategy always works well no matter how we choose the start and end. Moreover, we proposed high-to-low dynamic threshold strategy brings effective improvement, but the lowto-high strategy drops the performance, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed dynamic threshold strategy and our hypothesis about the SSL that in the early training stage, the teacher needs a higher threshold to filter out wrong predictions that are going to be pseudo-labels, which ensures the accuracy of the initial optimization direction, and in the latter training stage, the teacher needs lower threshold to keep more predictions, which covers more hard objects so as to further boost the performance on these challenging objects. d. qualitative results and analysis Fig. 5 shows the visualizations of the predictions by PV-RCNN [30], 3DIoUMatch [38], and DDS3D with 2% labeled data on the KITTI [5] dataset the bird’s-eye view. As shown in Fig. 5, (a) generates the pseudo labels from the teacher network PV-RCNN before NMS operation. (b) shows the sparse predictions from 3DIoUMatch through filtering out (a) in NMS operation, whose high-quality objects are obtained by the score ranking in NMS. Thus, some highquality but low-score boxes may be eliminated due to the inconsistency between the confidence scores and the quality of the regressed boxes. (c) represents our dense pseudo-label generation strategy, which keeps more high-quality boxes compared to sparse pseudo-labels. (d) shows the final pseudo labels produced by our DDS3D, where all objects can be accurately localized. This effectively illustrates our dense pseudo labels are more reliable than traditional sparse pseudo labels. v. conclusion In this paper, we have presented a novel semi-supervised 3D object detection framework named DDS3D, which involves a dense pseudo-label generation mode and a dynamic threshold strategy. The dense pseudo label generation can retain more beneficial pseudo labels compared with the manner of filtering out a large number of redundant pseudo labels through NMS operation. Besides, the proposed dynamic threshold strategy can effectively adjust a proper threshold to cover more reliable pseudo labels, which is essential for our teacher-student semi-supervised framework. Finally, DDS3D outperforms the state-of-the-art method on 1% labeled data under the same settings, and the experiment results on the KITTI dataset validate the effectiveness of these two components in our DDS3D.