It is not uncommon for malicious sellers to collude with fake reviewers (also called spammers) to write fake reviews for multiple products to either demote competitors or promote their products’ reputations, forming a gray industry chain. To detect spammer groups in a heterogeneous network with rich semantic information from both buyers and sellers, researchers have conducted extensive research using Frequent Item Mining-based and graph-based methods. However, these methods cannot detect spammer groups with cross-product attacks and do not jointly consider structural and attribute features, and structure-attribute correlation, resulting in poorer detection performance. Therefore, we propose a collaborative training-based spammer group detection algorithm by constructing a heterogeneous induced sub-network based on the target product set to detect cross-product attack spammer groups. To jointly consider all available features, we use the collaborative training method to learn the feature representations of nodes. In addition, we use the DBSCAN clustering method to generate candidate groups, exclude innocent ones, and rank them to obtain spammer groups. The experimental results on real-world datasets indicate that the overall detection performance of the proposed method is better than that of the baseline methods. conclusions. (1) The SGDCTH, GroupStrainer, and HoloScope methods based on the heterogeneous network are better than the GSBC method based on the homogeneous network. (2) The SGDCTH method for detecting spammer groups in cross-product attacks is more consistent with real-life attacks on spammer groups than the GSDB method for detecting spammer groups from the review bursts of a single product. comparison analysis of the time complexity We compare and analyze the time complexity of the GSDB, GSBC, GroupStrainer, HoloScope, and SGDCTH methods, as shown in Table 5. The GSDB method uses the KDE method to generate candidate groups in the review bursts of single-product with time complexity O(n2) . The time complexity of the target product filtration and the group purification and classification are both O(n) , resulting in the total time complexity O(n2) . The GSBC method uses three loop levels to construct a reviewer relationship graph with time complexity O(n3) . The group generation and detection stage uses the min-cut method in one level of loops with a time complexity of O(n3) , so the total time complexity is O(n3) . The GroupStrainer method consists of two stages, i.e., target product detection and spammer group generation. Each stage has a time complexity O(n2) , so the total time complexity is O(n2) . For the HoloScope method, the time complexity of constructing the heterogeneous graph is O(n2) , and the time complexity of detecting dense blocks using SVD is O(n log n) , so the total time complexity is O(n2) . For the SGDCTH method, the time complexity of the target product filtration is O(n2) , the time complexity of constructing heterogeneous graph is O(n2) ,
the time complexity of node feature representation learning is O(n log n) , the time complexity of candidate groups generation is O(n2) , and the time complexity of the group purification and ranking stage is O(n) , so the total time complexity is O(n2). Overall, the total time complexity of GSBC is O(n3) , while the total time complexity of the GSDB, GroupStrainer, HoloScope, and SGDCTH methods are all O(n2) . In addition, since the SGDCTH method first filters target products vulnerable to attack by spammers, it makes SGDCTH focus on the review data closely related to target products, which greatly improves the algorithm’s efficiency. analysis of ablation We conduct an ablation analysis to evaluate our method and configure SGDCTH to the following settings. (1) SGDCTH_TP. A variant of our method, which utilizes the behavioral metric combining the abnormal distributions of product rating and product average rating used by Ji et al. (2020) in filtering target products. (2) SGDCTH_Stru. A variant of our method that only utilizes structural features, but ignores attribute and structure-attribute correlation features. (3) SGDCTH_Attr. A variant of our method that only utilizes attribute features, but ignores structural and structure-attribute correlation features. (4) SGDCTH_Stru+Attr. A variant of our method that utilizes structural and attribute features, but ignores structure-attribute correlation features. (5) SGDCTH_DPC. A variant of our method that utilizes the Density Peaks Clustering (DPC) method to discover candidate groups in the vector space of reviewers. (6) SGDCTH_K-Means. A variant of our method that utilizes the K-Means clustering method to discover candidate groups in the vector space of reviewers. (7) SGDCTH_No purification. A variant of our method that ignores the step of group purification. We analyze the precision, recall, and F1 values for SGDCTH with seven variants, as shown in Fig. 6. The precision curve in Fig. 6a shows that SGDCTH achieves the best performance. This is because it comprehensively considers structure, attribute, and structure-attribute correlation features when detecting spammer groups. Furthermore, it uses a more robust NFS metric to filter target products and a group purification method to filter innocent members of candidate groups generated by the DBSCAN method, which further improves the performance of SGDCTH. SGDCTH_TP shows inferior performance to SGDCTH, indicating the NFS metric is more robust to evasion than behavioral metrics (Ye and Akoglu 2015). In the precision curve between the 115th and 240th groups, SGDCTH_Stru and SGDCTH_Attr show inferior performance to SGDCTH_Stru+Attr, which indicates the necessity of considering structure and attribute features comprehensively. The performance of SGDCTH_Stru+Attr is inferior to that of SGDCTH, indicating the importance of considering the structureattribute correlation features. The detection performance of SGDCTH_DPC and SGDCTH_K-Means is inferior to that of SGDCTH, which indicates that DBSCAN is better than DPC and K-Means at discovering spammer groups that attack target products separately. In addition, SGDCTH_No purification shows inferior performance to SGDCTH, indicating the necessity of group purification. The recall curve in Fig. 6b shows that SGDCTH_Attr and SGDCTH_Stru+Attr have a higher recall, while SGDCTH_Stru has a lower recall. This indicates that the attribute features of nodes are somewhat adversarial. Spammers are prone to disguising their relationship with other members of groups (i.e., structural features) to evade the detector. The F1 curve in Fig. 6c shows that SGDCTH_Attr, SGDCTH_Stru, and SGDCTH_K-Means have the worst performance, indicating that all available information and a better clustering method should be considered when designing the detector to enhance its robustness. Table 5 The time complexity of SGDCTH with baseline methods
Method Target product filtration Construct graph Feature representation learning
Candidate groups generation Group purification and ranking (or classification) Total of time complexity
GSDB O (n) × × O (n2) O (n) O (n2) GSBC × O (n3) × O (n3) O (n) O (n3) GroupStrainer O (n2) O (n2) × O (n2) × O (n2) HoloScope × O (n2) × O (n log n) × O (n2) SGDCTH O (n2) O (n2) O (n log n) O (n2) O (n) O (n2) conclusion Online fake reviews have increasingly become a real threat to e-commerce evaluation and reputation systems, and detecting spammer groups is key to ensuring the credibility of review information on e-commerce websites. This paper proposes a collaborative trainingbased algorithm for detecting spammer groups in a heterogeneous network called SGDCTH. It greatly reduces the algorithm’s time complexity by filtering target products vulnerable to spammer attacks from the products’ viewpoint. To effectively learn low-dimensional vector representations of nodes, the SGDCTH method uses a collaborative training method to model the intra-partition and inter-partition proximity of a heterogeneous network, which considers the structure-attribute correlation. This makes our method detect suspicious spammer groups in e-commerce in terms of structure and attributes. Since genuine reviewers are easily mixed into the detected candidate groups and misjudged by the detector as spammers, SGDCTH utilizes the group purification method to filter the innocent individuals in candidate groups. This further improves the performance of our SGDCTH method. Abbreviations FIM Frequent item mining NFS Network footprint score B&C Group behavior and content S Group structure B&C+S Group behavior and structure HIN Heterogeneous information network HISN Heterogeneous induced sub-network KDE Kernel density estimation SVD Singular value decomposition RD Rating deviation EXR Ratio of extreme rating MRO Most reviews one-day AD Account duration ATR Active time interval reviews
