The broader construction industry is struggling with data loss, inefficient processes and low productivity in asset management. The remedy to these problems seems to be the idea of Digital Twin (DT). However, the frameworks proposed so far do not always support a solution to these problems. This paper conducts an extensive literature review to develop a conceptual framework for the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) phase for cubic facilities. The conceptual framework takes into account the increasingly popular Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies. The presented framework, after appropriate modifications, can also be applied to infrastructure facilities or city fragments. The paper presents limitations and directions for further research. The DT paradigm has been adopted and its adoption is ongoing. Its implementation will progress in the coming years. conclusions and insights were drawn, and divided into three levels: (1) DT as just an enhanced version of the BIM model, (2) DT as semantic platforms for data flow, and (3) DT as AI-enabled agents for data analysis and feedback handling (Zhang et al. 2021). The evolution of BIM-based DTs represents a milestone for the strategic development of proactive planning and safety management solutions in the construction industry (Torrecilla-García, Pardo-Ferreira, Rubio-Romero, 2021). Deng et al. (2021) defined five levels of investigation from BIM to DT (Fig. 2). Level 1 is defined as a rich information model of a building object that is used not only in design, but also during construction and operation. Level 2 implies the use of BIM for analysis, simulation or reporting to support decision-making, including during the construction phase (Jiang, 2021). However,
this requires a high level of digital skills that building owners and managers generally do not have. At level 3, there is integration with IoT, and this enables real-time monitoring and visualization of data. Level 4 is decision support using AI tools. This allows for quick, automatic or semi-automatic responses. The results of the research indicate that hybrid solutions and combining technologies (BIM, AI etc.) are helping to better support decision-making systems in construction projects (Sun, Liu, 2022). Level 5 involves additional human control, and in this case, applications or systems to support such work are necessary. In this way, there is interaction between the physical layer and the digital layer, with continuous human involvement (Klinc, Turk, 2019). The first two levels are being adopted by industry and enterprises (Wen et al. 2021), while the next two are in the adoption phase (Megahed, Hassan, 2022). The fifth level is the most challenging. The authors of the study additionally show that the work grades well at Levels 2 and 3, which are BIM-supported simulation and BIM-IoT integration in the management of the built environment, more difficult challenges arise at Levels 4 and 5 (Deng, Menassa, Kamat, 2021). At Level 3, both location data and user feedback are combined with environmental data from sensors and spatial data from BIM data to generate the final resulting model (Abdelrahman, Chong, Miller, 2022). IoT devices are being deployed to collect real-time data on the current status of construction operations with little manual interaction. The rich source of IoT data
serves as the basis for cyber-physical synchronization, which must be mapped to an IFC (or other) schema to ensure model interoperability, and then stored as event logs for data analysis and intelligent inference (Pan, Zhang, 2021).  Conclusion
The DT conceptual framework for O&M presented in the paper can be put into practice through application in a cubic facility. The results of such an experiment could bring closer the real-world adoption of DT in enterprises and later in national economies. The shift in emphasis from BIM to DT is becoming increasingly apparent in the scientific world. With appropriate modifications, the framework can also be used for an infrastructure facility or housing development. More and more spaces are being digitized, and the cyber-physical connection is increasingly desirable. The advantages and benefits are certainly more numerous than the barriers and risks posed by the use of DT.