Estimation of the number of sources in a linear mixture is a critical preprocessing step in the separation and analysis of the sources for many applications. Historically, statistical methods, such as the minimum description length and Akaike information criterion, have been used to estimate the number of sources based on the autocorrelation matrix of the received mixture. In this paper, we introduce an alternative, topologybased method to compute the number of source signals present in a linear mixture for the class of constant-amplitude, monocomponent source signals. As a proof-of-concept, we include an example of three such source signals that overlap at multiple points in time and frequency, which the method correctly identifies from a set of eight redundant measurements. These preliminary results are promising and encourage further investigation into applications of topological data analysis to signal processing problems. ii. method development and discussion In practical terms, the method consists of only three steps: (1) embed an observed signal as a manifold in higher dimensional space, (2) compute the Betti number sequence [8] of the manifold using TDA, and (3) match the Betti number sequence to a known reference sequence. As shown in Section III, implementation of these steps is straightforward with appropriate software. Thus, the primary contribution of this paper is the analysis of the mathematical mechanisms by which the method achieves valid results. In Subsection II-A we provide the basic topological theory behind the method. In Subsection II-B we apply this theory to the case of a linear mixture as might be encountered in a radar, sonar, or multi-receiver communication array. In Subsection II-C, we discuss the primary constraint the measured data must meet in order for the method to work, and provide a potential avenue to circumvent the constraint in practice. In Subsection II-D, we briefly describe the tool used to compute the Betti number sequence of a given data set, and how to use this sequence to estimate the number of sources in the mixture. a. topological analysis of monocomponent mixtures We begin by analyzing the mixing problem through the lens of topology. First, let x(t) = [x1(t), x2(t), ..., xn(t)]⊤ be the vector of n independent sources. If we consider each xi(t) as the motion of a point along an orthogonal basis vector of Rn, then x(t) can be interpreted as a parametric path through Rn. We restrict each xi(t) to be a continuous signal of the form xi(t) = Aicos(αi(t)), where Ai is the constant amplitude of xi(t), and αi(t) is a continuous function of time encoding the instantaneous frequency and phase of xi(t). Since each αi could include a constant phase term in the interval [−π, π], we can say that these sinusoidal sources are “cosines” without any loss of generality. Sources of this type are often referred to as constant-amplitude “monocomponent signals” in the literature and are frequently encountered in radar (e.g., chirps) and telecommunication (e.g., continuous phase frequency modulated signals) applications. Constant-amplitude monocomponent signals are of special interest since they can be embedded as topological circles in R2 [9]. To see this, consider that the Hilbert transform of xi(t) is immediately obtained as x̃i(t) = Aisin(αi(t)), where Ai and αi are unchanged from their xi(t) counterparts [10] . Then, by simple trigonometric identity, the expression x2i (t)+ x̃2i (t) equals the constant A 2 i for all times t, which is the definition of a circle in the plane [9]. Considering now each component xi(t) and its Hilbert transform x̃i(t) as the motion of a point along mutually orthogonal axes in R2n, we find that the trajectory of this point (i.e., the phase portrait of x(t)) forms a path on an n-torus since (S1)n = Tn [11]. As discussed in [11], the path itself may not actually become dense on the torus but form a torus knot instead when the ratio of instantaneous frequencies of individual components of x(t) are rational throughout the observation window. This condition is unlikely to occur for incoherent signals with nonstationary frequencies, so we set aside this outlier case and assume that the path becomes dense on the Tn manifold. By the Künneth formula [12], the Betti number sequence for an n-torus is given by the coefficients of the Poincaré polynomial (1 + q)n. This sequence is a topological invariant of the n-torus, i.e., it is invariant under homeomorphisms and embeddings [8]. The existence of this topological invariant allows us to compute the number of sources in a mixture of monocomponent signals as follows. Let y(t) ∈ Rm be the vector composed of m independent observations of mixtures of x(t), and let z(t) ∈ R2n be defined as [x1(t), x̃1(t), x2(t), x̃2(t), ..., xn(t), x̃n(t)]
⊤. Let w(t) ∈ R2m be a vector defined by w(t) = f(z(t)), where f is an arbitrary function mapping R2n → R2m. When f is a homeomorphism (when m = n) or an embedding (when m > n), the Betti number sequences of the phase portraits of w(t) and z(t) will be equal. So, if we can find a suitable method to embed the observed vector y(t) into R2m as w(t) such that f exists and is a homeomorphism or embedding, then we can simply compute the Betti number sequence of the phase portrait of w(t) to recover the Betti number sequence of the phase portrait of z(t). Subsection II-B provides such a method for the scenario of a generic receiver array. Once computed, if we find that the Betti number sequence of z(t) matches the the coefficients of the polynomial (1 + q)n, we know that there exist n monocomponent sources in the mixture. In summary, our estimation strategy is: (1) embed an Rm signal mixture into R2m, (2) compute the Betti number sequence, and (3) compare the sequence to the coefficients of (1 + q)n.
 In this paper, we introduced a topology-based method to estimate the number of source signals present in a linear, monocomponent mixture. In particular, we showed how the analytic form of a mixture of n monocomponent signals generates a phase space which is homeomorphic to the n-torus, so by using TDA tools to recover the topological features of the mixture, we can determine the number of signals making up the mixture. While this method is only directly applicable to constant-amplitude monocomponent source signals in its current form, these signals are nonetheless commonplace in wireless communications and radar scenarios. Therefore, the method could have substantial real-world applicability without significant modification. Our provided demonstration of the method is merely a proof-of-concept, as there are many aspects to the method that require further research in order to refine. We strongly encourage other researchers to join us in this endeavour.