conclusions & future research The problems that were aimed to tackle in this research were related to waiting list problems for master program courses within the I&CS department at Utrecht University. The main research question was the following: “How can waiting list procedures for master program courses in I&CS be improved to make sure that the chances of participating are as fair as possible for every student?”. The methods mentioned in Section VIII-B after refining the proposed procedure from Section VII based on received feedback provide an answer. Based on literature and interview results, waiting list procedures can be improved by integrating three aspects into the process. The first one is changing the use of waiting lists. Instead of using a waiting list only as soon as the course is booked in full, all students will be put on a waiting list upon registration for a course automatically. This allows for more students to get onto the waiting list for a longer period of time, so incoming students can register themselves for courses as well. The handling of the waiting list can then be postponed until all students have signed up for a course. The second aspect is formalizing the handling of the waiting list by defining priority criteria. In the current procedure, there are some rules about who to prioritize over others, but there is no (ranked) list of the exact criteria on which waiting lists are handled. Explicit information about waiting list handling is also currently not provided to students. The defined priority criteria for the improved procedure allow for a fair process of selecting which students will be enrolled for a course. When a student is not selected for a course, the student can easily be notified by mail that explains why. For transparency reasons, these criteria should also be published on the department’s web page. The final optimization that has been made over the current procedure is the automation of the process. Based on that filtering process, an information system or education coordinator decides which students will be enrolled.