conclusions In this paper, we introduced a computational evaluation framework for singable lyric translation, grounded in the musical, linguistic, and cultural understanding of lyrics, comprised of four evaluation metrics, line syllable count distance (Dissyl), phoneme repetition similarity (Simpho), musical structure distance (Dismus), and semantic similarity (Simsem). These metrics are designed to ensure that the translated lyrics maintain the integrity of melodies, degree of phoneme repetition, structural coherence, and semantics of the original lyrics. Our framework is automated, guaranteeing objectivity and efficiency in terms of time and cost. We showed the efficacy of our evaluation metrics by offering comparative statistics between singable and nonsingable lyrics. In addition, our analysis revealed that the degree of phoneme repetition in the original lyrics is frequently mirrored in the translated lyrics, musically similar sections tend to share the same phonemes and display comparable degrees of phoneme repetition, and section-wise analysis is better suited for evaluating semantic similarity for lyric translation than line-wise analysis. Nonetheless, there remains room for improvement. Although we have assembled a singable lyrics dataset, aligned across English, Japanese, and Korean, our dataset has some limitations; it lacks musical information and its volume is limited. As a result, we have not been able to incorporate musical notes into our experiment or conduct comparative studies across various genres. We recognize that an ideal lyric translation evaluation system should take into account the relationship between musical notes and phonemes, as well as adapt to different genres. Moreover, although we have endeavored to incorporate cultural understandings of poetry in different languages. For example, we noticed that cultural similarities might have an impact on the extent of semantic similarities. This is demonstrated in an English translation of “MIC Drop”, a K-pop song by BTS originally written in Korean, made by YouTuber Iris Phuong. The translated singable lyrics do not include a translation of the term “hyodo (효도, taking care of parents)” as there is no direct equivalent in English, while the Japanese version of the song effortlessly conveys the concept