There is an emerging interest in using agile methodologies in Global Software Development (GSD) to get the mutual benefits of both methods. Scrum is currently admired by many development teams as an agile most known methodology and considered adequate for collocated teams. At the same time, stakeholders in GSD are dispersed by geographical, temporal, and socio-cultural distances. Due to the controversial nature of Scrum and GSD, many significant challenges arise that might restrict the use of Scrum in GSD. We conducted a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) by following Kitchenham guidelines to identify the challenges that limit the use of Scrum in GSD and to explore the mitigation strategies adopted by practitioners to resolve the challenges. To validate our review findings, we conducted an industrial survey of 305 practitioners. The results of our study are consolidated into a research framework. The framework represents current best practices and recommendations to mitigate the identified distributed scrum challenges and is validated by five experts of distributed Scrum. Results of the expert review were found supportive, reflecting that the framework will help the stakeholders deliver sustainable products by effectively mitigating the identified challenges. 1 conclusion and future work There is an emerging concern of using agile practices in GSD projects to get the mutual benefits of both distributive and agile methods. Scrum, as an agile most known methodology, is currently admired by many development teams. It is typically considered productive for small-scale projects with co-located teams because scrum teams are self-organized and enabled on excellent team collaboration and communication. However, GSD are usually distributed by distance differences, which results in numerous challenges or risks that might affect team collaboration and communication processes. For sustainable development and
implementation of distributed Scrum in GSD, there is a need to identify and mitigate all the confronted challenges in distributed Scrum. This study identifies challenges associated with distributed scrum development by analyzing past studies and validated by practitioners through a survey. A framework is proposed to mitigate the challenges validated by practitioners, and expert review is conducted by interviewing five distributed scrum experts to validate the proposed framework. The focus of this study was the identification of distributed scrum challenges and the proposal of a framework to mitigate the identified challenges for sustainable distributed development. An extensive systematic literature review was conducted to ensure the maximum validity of the study. Selection criteria was defined to extract the studies, and 3348 studies were extracted initially from different renowned databases. After careful review of the studies, 56 articles were selected in response to RQ1 and RQ2. By performing a critical review on the studies, 12 major challenges were identified, and out of 12 challenges, distributed scrum practitioners accepted eight challenges through the survey. This study revealed that lack of communication, coordination, and collaboration among distributed scrum teams is the most critical challenge with frequency of 91%, and it leads to many other challenges. Efforts have been made to cover the maximum number of distributed scrum challenges and mitigation strategies available in the literature to propose a framework. Our proposed framework is expected to help distributed scrum practitioners to mitigate the confronted challenges while working in distributed Scrum effectively.