conclusion While research focused on entrepreneurship education in engineering fields is beginning to emerge, the majority of these studies have focused on assessing learning outcomes. Instead of examining the impact of EEPs, the presented study looks backwards into the antecedents for creating inclusive EEPs. Engineering education studies strongly suggest that entrepreneurship education positively impacts students’ learning and outcomes. These results and national calls for more entrepreneurial graduates reiterate that more students should be encouraged to participate in EEPs. The study findings contribute to building a better understanding of differences
between men and women in regard with factors informing their participation in noncompulsory EEPs. It is noted that the study was conducted at a large, research university which offered a wide range of curricular and co-curricular entrepreneurship programming. Thus, the direct transferability of the findings to other institutional contexts should be applied with caution, particularly at relatively smaller institutions and/or those with limited EEP offerings. Nonetheless, the study findings provide timely implications informing the development of new or revisiting existing EEPs that may foster greater participation from women. With the continued growth of EEPs in engineering education, the study findings provide grounding for researchers to examine student participation in EEPs in other institutional contexts, and develop evidence-based implications that are transferable to wider institutional contexts and academic entrepreneurial ecosystems. Overall, the emergent findings reiterate that more theoretical and research attention should be devoted toward examining curricular, pedagogical, advising, and outreach aspects of entrepreneurship programming for engineering students. v. limitations While the choice of qualitative methods in this exploratory work provides in-depth insights, the limitations of the presented study provides several avenues for future research and investigation. First, the study presented here was limited to 20 students at a large, research-focused institution, restricting the transferability of the findings to other institutional contexts. Although it is obvious that students from different backgrounds will differ in their reasons for participation in EEPs, engineering education studies focused on such examinations are scarce. In this research, contextual perspectives have the potential to reveal deeper insights as opposed to opposed to sole emphasis on individual differences [68]. 