The current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic highlights our fragility when we are exposed to emergent viruses either directly or through zoonotic diseases. Fortunately, our knowledge of the biology of those viruses is improving. In particular, we have more and more structural information on virions, i.e., the infective form of a virus that includes its genomic material and surrounding protective capsid, and on their gene products. It is important to have methods that enable the analyses of structural information on such large macromolecular systems. We review some of those methods in this paper. We focus on understanding the geometry of virions and viral structural proteins, their dynamics, and their energetics, with the ambition that this understanding can help design antiviral agents. We discuss those methods in light of the specificities of those structures, mainly that they are huge. We focus on three of our own methods based on the alpha shape theory for computing geometry, normal mode analyses to study dynamics, and modified Poisson–Boltzmann theories to study the organization of ions and co-solvent and solvent molecules around biomacromolecules. The corresponding software has computing times that are compatible with the use of regular desktop computers. We show examples of their applications on some outer shells and structural proteins of the West Nile Virus. 1. conclusions Viruses are pathogens that raise serious threats for human health: the recent SARSCoV-2 pandemic can unfortunately attest to this statement. Fortunately, our knowledge of those pathogens is improving. In particular, we have more and more structural information on virions (the complete, infective form of a virus that includes its genomic material and surrounding envelope) and on their gene products. This information is available in the PDB database (see, for example, Ref. [30] for a review on icosahedral virus structures in the PDB). It is important to adapt the tools and software platforms to enable the analyses of such structural information on very large macromolecular assemblies. In this paper, we have reviewed some of those methods. We focused on understanding the geometry of virions and viral structural proteins, on their dynamics, and their energetics, with the ambition that this understanding can help design antiviral agents [199]. We have discussed
those methods in light of the specificities of those structures, mainly that they are very large. We focused on three of our own methods that can analyze the geometry, dynamics, and energetics of such structures within computing times that are compatible with the use of regular desktop computers. We provided (brief) explanations of the theories behind them and described the corresponding software platforms, i.e., UnionBall, NormalModes, and AquaVit. Those programs are available in open source format at the address https: //www.cs.ucdavis.edu/~koehl/Projects/. We showed examples of their applications on the outer shell and some structural proteins of the West Nile Virus (WNV). The main assumption behind all the analyses described in this review is that structural information is available on the virus that is the target for drug development. Indeed, experimental structural information on virions is becoming widely available, as mentioned above. However, it remains that such information may sometimes be still insufficient. The recent successes of AlphaFold [39] and its successor AlphaFold2 [40], two softwares that are designed to predict the structure of a protein from its sequence only, raises hope that experimental structure determination will not be a bottleneck from antiviral drug developments. The successes of using AlphaFold2 for drug discovery, however, are currently limited [44], but provide hope for better computational drug design [45]. In this review, we treated geometry, dynamics, and energetics independently: this is clearly a limitation that needs to be addressed. For example, AquaVit, our program for analyzing the environment of a protein is fast, and as such, compares favorably with the ligand mapping in molecular dynamics simulations that have been designed for detecting and characterizing binding sites in proteins. AquaVit relies, however, on the static conformation of the protein of interest, while the molecular dynamics simulations account for its dynamics. As such, they can detect cryptic binding sites in proteins [109,184,187,188], namely sites that are not accessible unless a structural change occurs. Such conformational changes are inaccessible for AquaVit.