Apple scab is a fungal disease caused by Venturia inaequalis. Disease is of particular concern for growers, as it causes significant damage to fruit and leaves, leading to loss of fruit and yield. This article examines the ability of deep learning and hyperspectral imaging to accurately identify an apple symptom infection in apple trees. In total, 168 image scenes were collected using conventional RGB and Visible to Near-infrared (VIS-NIR) spectral imaging (8 channels) in infected orchards. Spectral data were preprocessed with an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) trained in segmentation to detect scab pixels based on spectral information. Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) was used to find the most discriminating channels in spectral data based on the healthy leaf and scab infested leaf spectra. Five combinations of false-colour images were created from the spectral data and the segmentation net results. The images were trained and evaluated with a modified version of the YOLOv5 network. Despite the promising results of deep learning using RGB images (P=0.8, mAP@50=0.73), the detection of apple scab in apple trees using multispectral imaging proved to be a difficult task. The high-light environment of the open field made it difficult to collect a balanced spectrum from the multispectral camera, since the infrared channel and the visible channels needed to be constantly balanced so that they did not overexpose in the images. 1. conclusion In this experiment, the efficacy of deep learning detection of apple scab disease was compared on multispectral and traditional RGB images. It was found that using multispctral imaging can be used to increase the contrast drastically between healthy and infected tissue; however, counter-intuitively, this did not lead to better results from the neural network detector. Several hypotheses for this were considered, including the small size of the dataset, or the effects of transfering learning on multispectral images that had been based on RGB colour images, specifically the COCO dataset. The higher contrast in multispectral images still suggests that they may be used in the future with neural networks with further
groundwork. CRediT authorship contribution statement