Children with cerebral palsy (CP) often show executive function (EF) impairments that are key to quality of life. The aim of this study was to assess whether a home-based computerized intervention program improves executive functions (EFs) compared to usual care. Sixty participants (30 females) with CP (8–12 years old) were paired by age, sex, motor ability, and intelligence quotient score and then randomized to intervention and waitlist control groups. The intervention group received a 12-week home-based computerized EF intervention (5 days/week, 30 min/day, total dose 30 h). Core and higher-order EFs were assessed before, immediately after, and 9 months after completing the intervention. The intervention group performed better than the waitlist control group in the three core EFs (immediately and 9 months after the intervention): inhibitory control (F = 7.58, p = 0.13 and F = 7.85, p = 0.12), working memory (F = 8.34, p = 0.14 and F = 7.55, p = 0.13), and cognitive flexibility (F = 4.87, p = 0.09 and F = 4.19, p = 0.08). No differences were found between the groups in higher-order EFs or EF manifestations in daily life. Conclusions: A home-based computerized EF intervention improved core EFs in children with CP, but further research is needed to identify strategies that allow the transfer of these improvements to everyday life. Trial registration: NCT04025749 retrospectively registered on 19 July 2019. What is Known: • One in two children with cerebral palsy has an intellectual impairment. Visual perception and executive functions are the most reported specific cognitive deficits. • The majority of interventions for cerebral palsy focus on motor impairments, but only a few randomized controlled trials have explored the effect of interventions on executive functions. What is New: • A home-based computerized cognitive intervention can improve the core executive functions of children with cerebral palsy. • Shortand long-term effects on core executive functions have been found. conclusions Our results indicate that a home-based computerized EF intervention, together with motivational monitoring strategies that enhance adherence, can improve the core EFs of children with CP for at least 9 months postintervention. This intervention could be complementary to conventional faceto-face therapies to intensively stimulate cognitive func