Deoxynivalenol (DON) in raw and processed grain poses significant risks to human and animal health. In this study, the feasibility of classifying DON levels in different genetic lines of barley kernels was evaluated using hyperspectral imaging (HSI) (382–1030 nm) in tandem with an optimized convolutional neural network (CNN). Machine learning methods including logistic regression, support vector machine, stochastic gradient descent, K nearest neighbors, random forest, and CNN were respectively used to develop the classification models. Spectral preprocessing methods including wavelet transform and max-min normalization helped to enhance the performance of different models. A simplified CNN model showed better performance than other machine learning models. Competitive adaptive reweighted sampling (CARS) in combination with successive projections algorithm (SPA) was applied to select the best set of characteristic wavelengths. Based on seven wavelengths selected, the optimized CARS-SPA-CNN model distinguished barley grains with low levels of DON (<5 mg/kg) from those with higher levels (5 mg/kg < DON ≤ 14 mg/kg) with an accuracy of 89.41%. The lower levels of DON class I (0.19 mg/kg ≤ DON ≤ 1.25 mg/kg) and class II (1.25 mg/kg < DON ≤ 5 mg/kg) were successfully distinguished based on the optimized CNN model, yielding a precision of 89.81%. The results suggest that HSI in tandem with CNN has great potential for discrimination of DON levels of barley kernels. 1. conclusions A combination of HSI technology and 1D-CNN was used in this study to classify DON levels in barley kernels. The data were subjected to one-step and two-step pre-processing after the enhancements as the physicochemical values of DON were too small. In order to eliminate the collinearity variable in the original spectrum and simplify the model, the feature wavelength extraction was performed. CARS was used to search hundreds of variables for characteristic wavelengths that may be related to the DON levels in the particulate samples, and these identified wavelengths are then re-optimized by the SPA. The results showed that the optimized CARS-SPA-CNN model was successfully used to distinguish barley samples with low levels of DON fortification (≤5 mg/kg) from those with high levels of DON fortification (>5 mg/kg) with a precision of 89.41%. Further, when classifying class I (DON: >0.19 mg/kg and ≤1.25 mg/kg) and class II (DON: >1.25 mg/kg and ≤5 mg/kg), the accuracy was 89.81%. Compared with other models, the proposed method showed the highest precision. However, the regression performance still has the potential to be improved, the processing of the initial data can be further improved and the laboratory environment can also affect the accuracy of the model.