Resting-state fMRI is an increasingly popular alternative to task-based fMRI. However, a formal quantification of the amount of information providedby resting-state fMRI as opposed to active task conditions about neural responses is lacking.Weconducteda systematic comparison of thequality of inferences derived from a resting-state and a task fMRI paradigm by means of Bayesian Data Comparison. In this framework, data quality is formally quantified in information-theoretic terms as the precision and amount of information provided by the data on the parameters of interest. Parameters of effective connectivity, estimated from the cross-spectral densities of resting-stateand task time series bymeans of dynamic causalmodelling (DCM), were subjected to the analysis. Data from50 individuals undergoing resting-state and a Theory-of-Mind taskwere compared, both datasets provided by the Human Connectome Project. A threshold of very strong evidence was reached in favour of the Theory-of-Mind task (>10 bits or natural units) regarding information gain, which could be attributed to the active task condition eliciting stronger effective connectivity. Extending these analyses to other tasks and cognitive systems will reveal whether the superior informative value of task-based fMRI observed here is case specific or a more general trend. author summary The ongoing replication crisis in neuroscience and the concurrent “paradigm shift” from task-based to resting-state fMRI raises a question about the relative quality of the data obtained from these imaging paradigms. We compared parameters of intrinsic effective connectivity estimated from resting-state and Theory-of-Mind datasets. The much weaker connectivity and consequent lower information gain of the resting condition was notable as the network was specified based on connectivity patterns observed under rest and consisted of regions associated with the default mode network, which is characterized by being active during rest. These results support the assumption that the resting connectivity of the default mode network may reflect physiological rather than neural processes, and that the neural system in question better lends itself to investigation under an active task condition. conclusions pertain only to this particular network, and not the informative value of rs-fMRI in general. More general statements about rs-fMRI will require extensive work that covers different cognitive systems and networks, as well as several alternative tasks. When considering the clinical utility of the imaging protocol, suitability of the task for the given patient population must be considered and similar analyses repeated on patient data. Furthermore, the superiority of the task fMRI data was here demonstrated with csd-DCM, and the results cannot be directly generalized to other models or analysis methods. conclusion The main finding of the present study is that a social cognition task (ToM) gave rise to more informative inferences about the effective connectivity of regions of the DMN than was enabled by rs-fMRI. The ToM task elicited stronger connections among regions compared to rs-fMRI, causing an increase in the measured information gain. The brain regions we examined were identified based on their activation during rs-fMRI, thus even for brain regions typically associated with activation during rest, there is a compelling argument for using an experimentally controlled task such as ToM to investigate them. Higher information gain due to stronger effective connectivity is an advantage in situations where the detectability of a network and reliability of the connectivity parameters are crucial, such as in clinical contexts. The present results therefore speak for an active task condition, such as the ToM task, to be preferred over rs-fMRI when investigating the (dys)function of the associated neural system. The strength of DCM is that it discriminates between neural and physiological sources of signal. The present results are therefore of interest also from a theoretical point of view, with the much weaker connectivity observed during rest supporting the assumption that the resting functional connectivity of DMN to a large part reflects physiological rather than neural processes. With this study we wanted to demonstrate the utility of the BDC framework for the present issue and it should be considered a starting point for such analyses.