The portion of the text mentioning future research directions is:

"The introduction of artificial intelligence in the clinic is a challenge that can be overcome only through the strong collaboration between clinicians, computational and laboratory scientists. In fact, artificial intelligence needs the access to large cohorts of patients, but also the biomarkers or the combination of markers should be measurable in a reproducible and easy manner. Lastly, the computational algorithms should be engineered in a user-friendly manner, especially in the setting of a busy practice. The performances of a metabolomics–AI system strongly depend on the patients used to develop the models. The provenance of source data, such as patients from a different health system or a population different from the one used to develop AI models, can affect the diagnostic performances. To this aim, the use of large-scale multi-center cohorts can reduce the risk of using a poorly described panel of patients for the development of the AI model. In addition, all the clinical data should be considered while building the model. Another important aspect is to make the results clinically meaningful. The selection of appropriate patient-oriented endpoints and metrics to assess the performances of the model should be performed. This phase should be always developed focusing on the outcomes reported by clinicians. Knowing why an algorithm predicts a decision is very important for clinicians but also for patients, especially in case there is disagreement between human and AI prediction. The challenge of delivering personalized care is also strictly correlated to the employment of adequate and reliable measurement of biomarkers. The analytical reproducibility is one of the most important issues for high-throughput technologies used for metabolomics analysis. This is particularly important when hundreds of samples are analyzed and elaborated using artificial intelligence algorithms. In fact, the quantification of molecules is affected by several factors such as the sample preparation, laboratory operators, the instrumentation used for the analysis, and biological variables. Although the use of spiked standards can reduce the sample preparation and instrumental variability, the reproducibility of untargeted metabolomic approaches is still limited, especially when different instruments are used. On the other hands, targeted metabolomics is characterized by a higher reproducibility, but at the same time the number of molecules that can be quantified is reduced, thus limiting its use in combination with AI algorithms. Finally, the AI structure should be engineered in a manner that facilitates the integration of the AI models into the clinical decision, avoiding the use of stand-alone decision points. In addition, systems that require manual work to enter data should be avoided. It is thus