"Even though the TBISTAT was not designed to be a general-purpose potentiostat, configured to perform voltammetric assays and user-defined DC-biased EIS scans as Jenkins et al. ABE-Stat, its performance has been increased in the 1-10KHz, 100–35 KO ranges when compared to the former. The Teensy LC MCU employed in the TBISTAT possesses a higher number of GPIOs than Jenkins ABE-Stat ESP8266. In addition, the Teensy LC true 12-bit ADC allows interrupt-driven ADC with sampling rates as high as 200 KHz, thus avoiding the use of leakage-prone AD5933 single-point DFT [37]. Jenkins et al. employed a 24-point DFT for excitation frequencies below 60 HZ using a DAC software-programmed AC excitation signal, a variation which was thought to result in significant discontinuities in impedance measurements at 2 Hz, 60 Hz, and 2 kHz using ABE-Stat, especially when the current signal was not a perfect sinusoid. The TBISTAT improves the design of Jenkin’s impedance analyzer by utilizing its own impedance analyzer circuit and a customized 1000-points FFT programmed in the Android application. The accurate sampling frequency definition in the Android application of the TBISTAT allows a fully customizable FFT frequency resolution for logarithmically spaced AC excitation signal frequency points, significantly reducing FFT spectral leakage and avoiding the use of windowing techniques before or after FFT. Furthermore, impedance measurement discontinuities when the TIA resistor changes as impedance increases are reduced using the same calibration resistors at the frequency range limits. In addition, the presence of a fourth-pole Sallen key LPF reduces the amplitude and duration of the perturbation, which in turn decreases the overall impact of this event on the electrochemical equilibrium of the AUIDE cell."

"Further studies are needed to identify nuisance factors affecting the electrochemical measurements using TBISTAT, such as temperature, humidity, electrical noise, and tests in real settings beyond the laboratory. Experiments should be carried out at clinical facilities with TBI patient’s blood for both the biosensor platform and the developed potentiostat at a clinically relevant range of concentrations of S100B. Moreover, the inability to measure S100B directly in plasma samples without the need for additional redox probes should be circumvented in future iterations of the developed biosensor platform so that electrochemical