Analogy is one of the core capacities of human cognition; when faced with new situations, we often transfer prior experience from other domains. Most work on computational analogy relies heavily on complex, manually crafted input. In this work, we relax the input requirements, requiring only names of entities to be mapped. We automatically extract commonsense representations and use them to identify a mapping between the entities. Unlike previous works, our framework can handle partial analogies and suggest new entities to be added. Moreover, our method’s output is easily interpretable, allowing for users to understand why a specific mapping was chosen. Experiments show that our model correctly maps 81.2% of classical 2x2 analogy problems (guess level=50%). On larger problems, it achieves 77.8% accuracy (mean guess level=13.1%). In another experiment, we show our algorithm outperforms human performance, and the automatic suggestions of new entities resemble those suggested by humans. We hope this work will advance computational analogy by paving the way to more flexible, realistic input requirements, with broader applicability. 1 conclusions and future work Detecting deep structural similarity across distant domains and transferring ideas between them is central to human thinking. We presented FAME, a novel method for analogy making. Compared to previous works, FAME is more expressive, scal-
able, robust and interpretable. It also allows partial matches and automatic entity suggestions to extend the analogies. FAME correctly maps 81.2% of classical 2x2 analogy problems. On larger problems, it achieves 77.8% perfect mappings (mean guess level=13.1%). FAME also outperforms humans in solving analogy mapping problems (90% vs. 70.2%). Interestingly, our automatic suggestions of new entities resemble those suggested by humans. To conclude, we hope FAME will pave the way for analogy-making algorithms that require lessrestrictive inputs and can scale up and tap into the vast amount of potential inspiration the web offers, augmenting human creativity. 8 ethical considerations & limitations While FAME can assist humans by inspiring nontrivial solutions to problems, it has been shown that humans struggle with detecting caveats in presented analogies (Holyoak et al., 1995). For example, the cardiovascular system is often taught to medical students in terms of water supply system (Swain, 2000). However, this analogy might also confuse them, as it ignores important differences between water and blood (e.g., blood clots). Thus, while our output is interpretable, it might still mislead people, and it is important to alert the users to this possibility. Another issue is the fact that FAME’s coverage highly depends on external resources (ConceptNet, Google AutoComplete, etc.). This might be particularly problematic when applied to low-resource languages. As the relations we look for are commonsense relations, rather than cultural or situational ones, using automatic translation might ameliorate the problem. Lastly, we also note these resources evolve over time, and thus if one is interested in reproducibility,
it is necessary to save snapshots of the extracted relations. 