Automatic response forecasting for news media
plays a crucial role in enabling content producers to efficiently predict the impact of news
releases and prevent unexpected negative outcomes such as social conflict and moral injury.
To effectively forecast responses, it is essential
to develop measures that leverage the social dynamics and contextual information surrounding
individuals, especially in cases where explicit
profiles or historical actions of the users are
limited (referred to as lurkers). As shown in a
previous study, 97% of all tweets are produced
by only the most active 25% of users. However,
existing approaches have limited exploration of
how to best process and utilize these important
features. To address this gap, we propose a
novel framework, named SOCIALSENSE, that
leverages a large language model to induce a
belief-centered graph on top of an existent social network, along with graph-based propagation to capture social dynamics. We hypothesize that the induced graph that bridges the gap
between distant users who share similar beliefs
allows the model to effectively capture the response patterns. Our method surpasses existing
state-of-the-art in experimental evaluations for
both zero-shot and supervised settings, demonstrating its effectiveness in response forecasting.
Moreover, the analysis reveals the framework’s
capability to effectively handle unseen user and
lurker scenarios, further highlighting its robustness and practical applicability “Your beliefs become your thoughts.
Your thoughts become your words. Your
words become your actions."
— Mahatma Gandhi
Automatic response forecasting (Figure 1) on receivers for news media is a burgeoning field of
The code is available at https://github.com/
chenkaisun/SocialSense
Pre
dictio
n
M
o
d
el
Sentiment
Polarity
Sentiment
Intensity
User Profile Social Context Historical Posts
-[Reply] How funny!
Democrats screwing
Democrats over.
-[Reply] You mean like
your administration did
along with the illegal FISA warrants
-[Post] Just do it......
Proud American willing
to consider all political
& religious
views. Defender of
democracy-not political
correctness. NO DMs w/solicitation.
Positive, Neutral,
Negative
0 (Least Intense)
3 (Most Intense)
Headline: About 200 people were arrested in Iran on
Saturday as anti-government protests in the country
continue into their fourth day
Response
Figure 1: An example illustrating the task. The input
consists of user attributes such as the profile and social
context together with a news media message. The model
is asked to predict response in multiple dimensions.
research that enables numerous influential applications, such as offering content producers a way
to efficiently estimate the potential impact of their
messages (aiding the prevention of unexpected negative outcomes) and supporting human writers in
attaining their communication goals (Sun et al.,
2023) for risk management. This direction is especially important nowadays as the proliferation
of AI-generated misinformation, propaganda, and
hate speech are becoming increasingly elusive to
detection (Hsu and Thompson, 2023; Owen and
Zahn, 2023). In this context, accurately forecasting
the responses from different audiences or communities to news media messages becomes critical.
One of the primary challenges in personalized
response forecasting lies in developing effective
user representations. A crucial aspect to consider
when representing a user is the integration of social
dynamics (e.g., social interactions around a user) as
well as their individual beliefs and interests. This
becomes particularly relevant for users who lack explicit profiles or historical activities (commonly
referred to as lurkers). Previous efforts, however,
have yet to explore the types of structural information that are helpful and how to best utilize such
information (Lin and Chen, 2008; Giachanou et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2021).
During our preliminary analysis, we observed
that users who share similar beliefs, specifically
social values, are often situated in distant communities within the explicit social network. To provide
further context, our findings reveal that a significant
portion (over 44.6%) of users in the network data
we collected for our experiment share beliefs with
other users who are at least two hops away in the
network. This emphasizes the importance of considering the connections between users with similar
beliefs, even if they are not directly linked in the
social network. Furthermore, previous research has
indicated that user history plays a significant role
in the model’s performance. However, it is often
directly utilized without processing in existing approaches, leading to the conclusion, we present SOCIALSENSE, a framework that utilizes a belief-centered graph, induced
by a large language model, to enable automatic response forecasting for news media. Our framework operates on the premise that connecting distant
users in social networks facilitates the modeling
of implicit communities based on shared beliefs.
Through comprehensive evaluations, we demonstrate the superior performance of our framework
compared to existing methods, particularly in handling lurker and unseen user scenarios. We also
highlight the importance of the different components within the framework.
