This study determined for the first time the structure of the peptides (i.e., peptidomics) in soy protein hydrolysates and elucidated their effects on an oil’s oxidative stability during frying cycles. The oil investigated was palm olein during 0, 4, 8, and 12 frying cycles of plantain banana chips. Proteins were extracted and hydrolyzed with two proteases. Trypsin hydrolysate (HTRY) exhibited higher anti-radical activity (DPPH, 70.2%) than the control (unhydrolyzed proteins, 33.49%) and pepsin hydrolysate (HPEP, 46.1%) at 200 μg/mL. HPEP however showed a 4.6-fold greater reduction of ferric ions (FRAP) while also possessing a higher peroxyl radical scavenging ability (716 ± 30 μM Trolox Eq/g) than HTRY (38.5 ± 35 μM Trolox Eq/g). During oil oxidative stability tests, HPEP improved the oxidative stability of the palm olein oil after 8 and 12 frying cycles, characterized by lower concentrations of hydroperoxides, and carbonyl and volatile compounds. HTRY however exerteda pro-oxidant activity. Structural data from SDS-PAGE and tandem mass spectrometry showed that the mechanism for the greater activity of the pepsin hydrolysate occurred due to unique structural features and a higher percentage of short-chain peptides. This was justified by a 25, 31, and 48% higher contents of tryptophan, histidine, and methionine, respectively (important amino acids with hydrogen atom transfer and electron-donating capacities) in the peptides identified in the pepsin hydrolysate. 1. conclusions The soy protein hydrolysate obtained from pepsin showed superior antioxidant activity over the one obtained from trypsin. Unstabilized palm olein showed a total oxidation product rate higher than the norm after eight frying cycles, while the oil stabilized with the trypsin hydrolysate showed a total oxidation product rate higher than the norm after all frying cycles. The oil stabilized with the pepsin hydrolysate showed a total oxidation product rate within the acceptable range up to eight frying cycles. The better performance of the pepsin hydrolysate was related to its greater proportions of smaller-sized peptides but, more importantly, to its higher content of protons and electron-donating amino acids, like tryptophan, histidine, and methionine, as well as the balance between hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues. 