The advent of new nanomaterials has resulted in dramatic developments in the field of energy production and storage. Due to their unique structure and properties, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are the most promising from the list of materials recently introduced in the field. The amazing progress in the use TMDs for energy storage and production inspired us to review the recent research on TMD-based catalysts and electrode materials. In this report, we examine TMDs in a variety of electrochemical batteries and solar cells with special focus on MoS2 as the most studied and used TMD material. 1. conclusions Transition metal dichalcogenides are an attractive option for researchers as unrivaled semiconductors in various fields of nanoscience and electrochemistry. We examined some applications of these materials in the field of energy production and storage. We briefly mentioned the generalities of these materials and the recent studies on the mechanisms of energy production and storage along with the applications in energy storage and production equipment such as electrochemical batteries and solar cells. It has been shown that TMDs—despite some shortcomings and problems due to their high-speed performance, long-term cycles, and high capacity in lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries and generally other rechargeable secondary batteries such as zinc-ion, magnesium-ion, aluminum-ion, calcium-ion, and potassium-ion—can be used as suitable electrode materials in the future. In addition, TMDs have shown potential for use in the field of solar energy conversion, specifically in the development of photovoltaic devices. The unique electronic and optical properties of TMDs, such as their two-dimensional structure, high absorption coefficients, and strong light-matter interactions, make them promising for use as active materials in solar cells. TMDs have been demonstrated to have a high light conversion efficiency and are able to absorb a wide range of light frequencies, making them an attractive material for the design of next-generation solar cells with improved performance. Furthermore, TMDs have the potential to significantly reduce the cost of solar cell production by enabling the use of low-cost and scalable fabrication methods.