The hydrolysate of bitter gourd seed protein, digested by the combined gastrointestinal proteases (BGSP-GPs), exhibited the most potent inhibition on angiotensin-I-converting enzyme (ACE) with an IC50 value of 48.1 ± 2.0 μg/mL. Using two independent bioassay-guided fractionations, fraction F5 from reversed-phase chromatography and fraction S1 from strong cation exchange chromatography exhibited the highest ACE inhibitory (ACEI) activity. Three identical peptides were simultaneously detected from both fractions and, based on the in silico appraisal, APLVSW (AW6) was predicted as a promising ACEI peptide. Their dipeptidyl peptidase-IV (DPP4) inhibitory (DPP4I) activity was also explored. The IC50 values of AW6 against ACE and DPP4 were calculated to be 9.6 ± 0.3 and 145.4 ± 4.4 μM, respectively. The inhibitory kinetics and intermolecular interaction studies suggested that AW6 is an ACE competitive inhibitor and a DPP4 non-competitive inhibitor. The quantities of AW6 in BGSP-GP hydrolysate, fractions F5 and S1, were also analyzed using liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry. Notably, AW6 could resist hydrolysis in the human gastrointestinal tract according to the result of the simulated gastrointestinal digestion. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first discovery and characterization of a dual-function (ACEI and DPP4I activities) peptide derived from bitter gourd seed protein. 1. conclusions A potential ACEI peptide (APLVSW) with DPP4I activity was identified from BGSPGP hydrolysate and screened using two orthogonal bioassay-guided fractionations coupled with in silico analysis. The ACEI and DPP4I IC50 values of APLVSW (AW6) were determined to be 9.6 ± 0.3 and 145.4 ± 4.4 µM, respectively. According to the molecular docking simulation and inhibition mechanism study, AW6 is a competitive ACEI and a non-competitive DPP4I peptide. The quantities of AW6 in 1 mg of BGSP-GP hydrolysate, fraction F5, and fraction S1 were 1.8 ± 0.2, 9.8 ± 0.3, and 2.5 ± 0.2 µg, respectively. Furthermore, AW6 is stable against SGI digestion, which indicates that AW6 might be resistant to the human gastrointestinal tract. This finding suggests that AW6 is promising as a potential ACEI peptide with DPP4I activity that could be beneficial for developing food supplements or therapeutic agents. 