In this study, we considered some pesticides as active substances within formulations for the protection of plant-based food in the Republic of Serbia in silico, because these pesticides have not often been investigated in this way previously, and in an analytical way, because there are not very many available fast, cheap, and easy methods for their determination in real agricultural samples. Seven pesticides were detected in selected agricultural products (tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, and grapes) using the QuEChERS methodology and HPLC-DAD. Standard curves for the investigated pesticides (chlorantraniliprole, methomyl, metalaxyl, thiacloprid, acetamiprid, emamectin benzoate, and cymoxanil) show good linearity, with R2 values from 0.9785 to 0.9996. The HPLC-DAD method is fast, and these pesticides can be determined in real spiked samples in less than 15 min. We further characterized the pesticides we found in food based on physicochemical properties and molecular descriptors to predict the absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination, and toxicity (ADMET) of the compounds. We summarized the data supporting their effects on humans using various computational tools to determine their potential adverse effects. The results of our prediction study show that all of the selected pesticides considered in this study have good oral bioavailability, and those with high toxicity, therefore, could be harmful to human health. Chlorantraniliprole was shown in a molecular docking study as a good starting point for a new Alzheimer’s disease drug candidate. 1. conclusions Selected pesticides (chlorantraniliprole, methomyl, metalaxyl, thiacloprid, acetamiprid, emamectin benzoate, and cymoxanil) were determined in agricultural products (tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers and grapes) using QuEChERS methodology and HPLC-DAD. Thiacloprid was found in the real sample of tomatoes without spiking. The HPLC-DAD method is fast because the pesticides can be determined in less than 15 min, and reliable because of the good linearity of standard curves. According to the EU standard, only the values found for pesticide residues of acetamiprid in peppers and metalaxyl in tomatoes are within the recommended values (0.3, and 0.2 mg/kg, respectively). AQVN/EIIP was shown as a good prediction tool for the behaviour of selected pesticides against acetylcholine esterase. These selected pesticides against acetylcholine esterase in silico show the same region for binding both in Mus musculus and Homo sapiens with some differences.