Microbial 1(2)-dehydrogenation of 3-ketosteroids is an important basis for the production of many steroid pharmaceuticals and synthons. When using the wild-type strains for whole cell catalysis, the undesirable reduction of the 20-carbonyl group, or 1(2)-hydrogenation, was observed. In this work, the recombinant strains of Mycolicibacterium neoaurum and Mycolicibacterium smegmatis were constructed with blocked endogenous activity of 3-ketosteroid-9α-hydroxylase, 3-ketosteroid1(2)-dehydrogenase (3-KSD), and expressing 3-KSD encoded by the gene KR76_27125 (kstD2NS) from Nocardioides simplex VKM Ac-2033D. The in vivo activity of the obtained recombinant strains against phytosterol, 6α-methyl-hydrocortisone, and hydrocortisone was studied. When using M. smegmatis as the host strain, the 1(2)-dehydrogenation activity of the constructed recombinant cells towards hydrocortisone was noticeably higher compared to those on the platform of M. neoaurum. A comparison of the strengths of inducible acetamidase and constitutive hsp60 promoters in M. smegmatis provided comparable results. Hydrocortisone biotransformation by M. smegmatis BD/pMhsp_k expressing kstD2NS resulted in 95.4% prednisolone yield, and the selectivity preferred that for N. simplex. Mycolicibacteria showed increased hydrocortisone degradation at 35 ◦C compared to 30 ◦C. The presence of endogenous steroid catabolism in Mycolicibacterium hosts does not seem to confer an advantage for the functioning of KstD2NS. The results allow for the evaluation of the prospects for the development of simple technological methods for the selective 1(2)-dehydrogenation of 3-ketosteroids by growing 1. conclusions The heterologous expression of 3-KSD encoded by kstD2NS from Nocardioides simplex VKM Ac-2033D was carried out in two Mycolicibacterium strains under the control of two strong promoters and analyzed based on the target activity of KstD2NS in model whole-cell bioconversions. It was found that KstD2NS was functional in mycolicibacteria; however, the specific activity towards hydrocortisone was noticeably higher when using M. smegmatis BD compared to M. neoaurum as a host strain. The strengths of the inducible acetamidase and constitutive hsp60 promoters in M. smegmatis strains expressing kstDNS were found to be similar, but in the case of hsp60, slightly higher target activity was noted against the background of greater ease of operation. The strain M. smegmatis BD in combination with constructed pMami_k and pMhsp_k recombinant plasmids turned out to be convenient tools for in vivo estimation of the individual activity of the heterologous 3-KSD. The high selectivity of M. smegmatis BD/pMhsp_k as a biocatalyst was demonstrated, thus indicating the promise of a technologically simple approach for 1(2)-dehydrogenation of steroids with growing actinobacterial cells expressing heterologous genes of 3-KSD.