Phenolic compounds have recently gained interest, as they have been related to improvements in health and disease prevention, such as inflammatory intestinal pathologies and obesity. However, their bioactivity may be limited by their instability or low concentration in food matrices and along the gastrointestinal tract once consumed. This has led to the study of technological processing with the aim of optimizing phenolic compounds’ biological properties. In this sense, different extraction systems have been applied to vegetable sources for the purpose of obtaining enriched phenolic extracts such as PLE, MAE, SFE, and UAE. In addition, many in vitro and in vivo studies evaluating the potential mechanisms of these compounds have also been published. This review includes a case study of the Hibiscus genera as an interesting source of phenolic compounds. The main goal of this work is to describe: (a) phenolic compound extraction by designs of experiments (DoEs) applied to conventional and advanced systems; (b) the influence of the extraction system on the phenolic composition and, consequently, on the bioactive properties of these extracts; and (c) bioaccessibility and bioactivity evaluation of Hibiscus phenolic extracts. The results have pointed out that the most used DoEs were based on response surface methodologies (RSM), mainly the Box–Behnken design (BBD) and central composite design (CCD). The chemical composition of the optimized enriched extracts showed an abundance of flavonoids, as well as anthocyanins and phenolic acids. In vitro and in vivo studies have highlighted their potent bioactivity, with particular emphasis on obesity and related disorders. This scientific evidence establishes the Hibiscus genera as an interesting source of phytochemicals with demonstrated bioactive potential for the development of functional foods. 1. conclusions may be taken with certain reservations, as the determinant values were obtained through non-selective analytical evaluation, and more specific methodologies, such as HPLC systems, were not considered. In fact, this selective analytical methodology was considered in other studies which evaluated the efficiency of PLE, CO2-SFE, and MAE techniques [33–35]. In these studies, SFE and MAE extracts were analyzed by HPLC-ESITOF-MS, while PLE extracts were characterized using HPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS. In this case, anthocyanins were only identified in PLE extractions [35], as SFE did not consider their analysis [33], and in MAE, a degradation of these compounds was observed as a result of extreme extraction conditions [34]. From the selected articles, it can be concluded that PLE is the most optimal extraction method for anthocyanins, even despite the slight degradation that was observed when a high extraction temperature and increased time was applied. Foods 2023, 12, 963 9 of 15
Lastly, the extraction of phenolic acids from Hibiscus sabdariffa was also considered for optimization with different extraction techniques [33–35]. The principal identified compounds were neochlorogenic acid, chlorogenic acid, caffeoylshikimic acid, and coumarouylquinic acid. Of all the considered extraction techniques, SFE proved to be the least efficient, as extraction of these phenolic acids was quite limited. This was also observed for caffeoylshikimic acid and cumaroilquinic acid when PLE was the selected technique for extraction. . 4. conclusions Hibiscus sabdariffa has proven to be a promising plant source of an abundance of phenolic compounds, from flavonoids such as myricetin, quercetin, and derivatives; phenolic acids, especially caffeic, chlorogenic, coumaroylquinic, gallic, and ellagic acids; and anthocyanins, such as delphinidin, cyanidin, and derivatives. The best extraction methodology
Foods 2023, 12, 963 13 of 15
for maximum total polyphenol recovery was UAE, whereas PLE was the most adequate technique for recovering flavonoids, anthocyanins, and phenolic acids. In fact, PLE reported a high extraction yield for all studied compounds; thus, it should be proposed for a combined extraction from Hibiscus polyphenols. On the contrary, CO2-SFE seemed to be the least efficient for obtaining enriched phenolic extracts from Hibiscus. Moreover, the extraction of these compounds appears to be essential for their bioactivity, as their effects on recorded pathologies such as obesity are related to their content in the mentioned compounds.