Diseases induced by bacterial and viral infections are common occurrences in our daily life, and the main prevention and treatment strategies are vaccination and taking antibacterial/antiviral drugs. However, vaccines can only be used for specific viral infections, and the abuse of antibacterial/antiviral drugs will create multi−drug−resistant bacteria and viruses. Therefore, it is necessary to develop more targeted prevention and treatment methods against bacteria and viruses. Proteins on the surface of bacteria and viruses can specifically bind to sugar, so glycopolymers can be used as potential antibacterial and antiviral drugs. In this review, the research of glycopolymers for bacterial/viral detection/inhibition and antibacterial/antiviral applications in recent years are summarized. 1. conclusions and outlook Glycopolymers have been widely studied in the fields of bacterial detection and capture, inhibiting bacterial infection, inhibiting viral infection and so on. Additionally, glycopolymers may be applied to detect the type of pathogen or to perform precise treatment without affecting the intestinal flora for practical applications. Glycopolymers have the ability to recognize proteins specifically, and the binding of glycopolymers with bacteria and viruses can be improved and regulated by varying sugar type, sugar density and topological structure. A variety of sugars, such as mannose and glucose, have been chosen to synthesize glycopolymers that identify bacteria. The current reported articles show great potential for the application of glycopolymers in the treatment of bacterial and viral infection, although most reports are still very preliminary. Moreover, the use of glycopolymers is unnecessary if broad−spectrum sterilization is needed. It should be noted that many bacteria have similar sugar−binding sites towards certain sugars. For example, both Escherichia coli and Salmonella spp. have binding sites toward mannose. In order to increase specificity, polymer chain composition, sequence and structure need to be tailored for different bacteria. The cytotoxicity of glycopolymers is another parameter that needs to be considered. Mammalian membranes are rich in cholesterol and composed primarily of lipids with a lower
Molecules 2023, 28, 985 13 of 16
net charge compared to bacterial membranes [73]. Therefore, glycopolymers with high antibacterial activity and low cytotoxicity are required based on the different natures of bacterial and mammalian cell membranes. It is worth noting that most synthetic antibacterial glycopolymers reported in the literature are nondegradable and might stimulate immune cells to elicit some unknown immune effects, which limits their application in vivo. Inactive and low−toxic polymers may reduce the possibility of bacteria becoming resistant to them as well as the accumulation of cytotoxicity in their environment. In addition, new elements, such as selenium [74] and molecular “needles” or “razors” [75], can be incorporated into the glycopolymer chain for enhanced antibacterial performance. Regarding the application in the field of inhibiting virus infection, the reported strategies are divided into two main types: 1. Binding to virus directly. For example, sialyllactose−containing polymers can bind to influenza virus and mumps virus. 2. Binding to host cells that are the targets of the virus, so the virus cannot compete with the glycopolymer to bind to the host cells. For example, mannose−based glycopolymers can bind to DC−SIGN on the surface of dendritic cells, which is usually a target of HIV. Glycopolymers with enhanced specificity and appropriate polymer chain composition, sequence and structure are required. The effectiveness of cancer immunotherapy has aroused people’s great interest in applying these methods to treat bacterial and viral infections [74–78]. Glycopolymers have shown potential in cancer immunotherapy [79,80], which is believed to be a good candidate for bacterial and viral immunotherapy treatment with proper molecular design.