Whether in organic synthesis or solar energy conversion, light can be a powerful reagent in chemical reactions and introduce new opportunities for synthetic control including duration, intensity, interval, and energy of irradiation. Here, we report the use of a molecular photosensitizer as a reducing agent in metallic nanoparticle syntheses. Using this approach, we report three key findings. (1) Nanoparticles produced by photocatalytic reduction form via a continuous nucleation mechanism, as opposed to burst and burst-like nucleation processes typically observed in metal nanoparticle syntheses. (2) Because nucleation is continuous, as long as the solution is irradiated (and there remains excess reagents in solution), nanoparticle nucleation can be turned on and off by controlling the timing and duration of irradiation, with no observable particle growth. (3) This synthetic method extends to the formation of bimetallic nanoparticles, which we show also form via a continuous nucleation pathway, and follow predicted patterns of metal incorporation as a function of the magnitude of the difference between the reduction potentials of the two metals. Taken together, these results establish a versatile synthetic method for the formation of multimetallic nanoparticles using visible light. conclusions In summary, we report a synthetic method for the preparation of metallic NPs using photocatalytic reduction via the excitation of a molecular PS with visible light. We show that by combining the benets of visible-light driven reactions with catalytic reactions, we can generate a synthesis with several intriguing aspects. First, the reaction follows a continuous nucleation pathway, which allows for the opportunity to control NP formation as a function of time. Second, because the reaction is photo-driven, NP nucleation can be turned on and off using only light without impacting NP size. Third, the concentration of metal precursor added during the reaction changes the amount of NP growth, which can be leveraged in future studies to access more complex NPmorphologies. Finally, these results, including continuous NP formation, were observed in a variety of bimetallic NP systems as well, showing reasonable substrate versatility. data availability Supporting and additional data can be found in the ESI† including extended TEM, extinction spectroscopy, and ICP-OES analyses and control experiments. author contributions The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the nal version of the manuscript. © 2023 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
O pe
n A
cc es
s A
rt ic
le . P
ub lis
he d
on 1
5 Fe
br ua
ry 2
02 3. D ow
nl oa
de d
on 1
/1 1/
20 24
9 :5
0: 11
P M . T hi s ar tic le is li ce ns ed u nd er a C re at iv e C om m on s A ttr ib ut io nN on C om m er ci al
3 .0
U np
or te
d L
ic en
ce . conflicts of interest There are no conicts to declare.