Hyperuricemia is linked to a variety of disorders that can have serious consequences for human health. Peptides that inhibit xanthine oxidase (XO) are expected to be a safe and effective functional ingredient for the treatment or relief of hyperuricemia. The goal of this study was to discover whether papain small yellow croaker hydrolysates (SYCHs) have potent xanthine oxidase inhibitory (XOI) activity. The results showed that compared to the XOI activity of SYCHs (IC50 = 33.40 ± 0.26 mg/mL), peptides with a molecular weight (MW) of less than 3 kDa (UF-3) after ultrafiltration (UF) had stronger XOI activity, which was reduced to IC50 = 25.87 ± 0.16 mg/mL (p < 0.05). Two peptides were identified from UF-3 using nano-high-performance liquid chromatography– tandem mass spectrometry. These two peptides were chemically synthesized and tested for XOI activity in vitro. Trp-Asp-Asp-Met-Glu-Lys-Ile-Trp (WDDMEKIW) (p < 0.05) had the stronger XOI activity (IC50 = 3.16 ± 0.03 mM). The XOI activity IC50 of the other peptide, Ala-Pro-Pro-Glu-Arg-LysTyr-Ser-Val-Trp (APPERKYSVW), was 5.86 ± 0.02 mM. According to amino acid sequence results, the peptides contained at least 50% hydrophobic amino acids, which might be responsible for reducing xanthine oxidase (XO) catalytic activity. Furthermore, the inhibition of the peptides (WDDMEKIW and APPERKYSVW) against XO may depend on their binding to the XO active site. According to molecular docking, certain peptides made from small yellow croaker proteins were able to bind to the XO active site through hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions. The results of this work illuminate SYCHs as a promising functional candidate for the prevention of hyperuricemia. 1. conclusions Peptides (WDDMEKIW and APPERKYSVW) with XOI activity were identified after enzymatic hydrolysis and UF separation of SYC proteins, and the IC50 values (IC50 = 3.16 ± 0.03 mM and 5.86 ± 0.02 mM, respectively) of XOI activity were calculated in vitro. These findings were validated by molecular docking of the two peptides chosen for the strongest XOI activity, which highlighted the importance of hydrophobic bonds and hydrogen bonds in the establishment of a stable complex conformation and the resulting inhibitory effect of the peptides. In terms of preserving peptide activity, micro- and nano-encapsulation of bioactive
Foods 2023, 12, 982 12 of 14
peptides may be an effective way to manage their release and avoid degradation in order to optimize their bioavailability and effectiveness.