Betaine is a non-essential amino acid with proven functional properties and underutilized potential. The most common dietary sources of betaine are beets, spinach, and whole grains. Whole grains—such as quinoa, wheat and oat brans, brown rice, barley, etc.—are generally considered rich sources of betaine. This valuable compound has gained popularity as an ingredient in novel and functional foods due to the demonstrated health benefits that it may provide. This review study will provide an overview of the various natural sources of betaine, including different types of food products, and explore the potential of betaine as an innovative functional ingredient. It will thoroughly discuss its metabolic pathways and physiology, disease-preventing and healthpromoting properties, and further highlight the extraction procedures and detection methods in different matrices. In addition, gaps in the existing scientific literature will be emphasized. 1. conclusions and perspectives Betaine plays three major roles in the mammalian organism. Firstly, as an organic osmolyte, it maintains normal cell volume under osmotic stress caused by various factors. Secondly, it provides protection against protein denaturation, and, thirdly, besides methylfolate, betaine is the only molecule that provides methyl groups for homocysteine remethylation. Food that contains either betaine or choline provides the body with betaine. Betaine is not regarded as an essential food because it may be irreversibly produced in the human body from free choline with the aid of the choline dehydrogenase enzyme. However, the body’s natural ability to produce betaine is typically insufficient to meet daily requirements. Therefore, it may be said that consuming betaine through diet is required. The highest concentrations in food matrices were observed in cereal grains, pseudocereals (especially amaranth and quinoa), cereal products (wholegrain flour, bread, pasta, couscous, and breakfast cereals), some vegetables (spinach and beetroot), and the majority of seashells (mussels, oysters, clams, and scallops). Many pre-clinical studies gave good insights into the possible antioxidant, hepato-, nefro-, cardio-, and neuroprotective roles of betaine supplementation, as well as its ability to
Molecules 2023, 28, 4824 16 of 22
enhance endurance and sports performance. In the nutrition of chicken, young grouper, and other animal species, betaine has been utilized for many years as a feeding stimulant and feed enhancer. It was this that inspired the concept of a betaine-fortified human diet.