Given its critical role in cell mitosis, the tubulin γ chain represents a viable chemotherapeutic target to solve the specificity issues associated with targeting α and β tubulin. Since γ tubulin is overexpressed in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and some breast lesions, the glaziovianin A derivative gatastatin, presented as a γ-tubulin-specific inhibitor, could yield a successful therapeutic strategy. The present work aims to identify the binding sites and modes of gatastatin and its derivatives through molecular-docking simulations. Computational binding free energy predictions were compared to experimental microscale thermophoresis assay results. The computational simulations did not reveal a strong preference toward γ tubulin, suggesting that further derivatization may be needed to increase its specificity. 1. conclusions There are numerous tubulin-targeting compounds that are effective anticancer agents, as they tend to impact dividing cells more potently than nondividing ones. However, targeting abundant α and β tubulin proteins almost always leads to severe side effects. These deleterious side effects may be reduced by increasing drugs’ specificity for tubulin isoforms, which are expressed more abundantly in cancerous cells than in healthy ones. For some tumors, a possible way to discriminate between healthy and cancerous cells may be to target γ tubulin instead of the α-β dimer since γ tubulin plays an essential role in mitosis forming nucleating rings for microtubules, particularly mitotic spindle microtubules. Thus, inhibiting its functions could have a powerful antimitotic effect. Importantly, γ tubulin has been found to be overexpressed in glioblastoma multiforme, some breast lesions, and carcinomas, while in healthy tissue cells, it is less abundant than α-β, making up less than 1% of the total tubulin content of a cell. Therefore, a compound having a strong specificity for γ tubulin could have fewer off-target interactions. The search for such compounds has been on-going for almost two decades. For the above reasons, it was exciting news when Chinen et al. identified a potential specific and selective γ tubulin inhibitor. The results of their drug-binding assays for colchicine, AG1, and gatastatin indicated that gatastatin bound to γ tubulin with a 12-fold higher affinity than to α-β tubulin. Chinen et al. then suggested that gatastatin’s mode of action was blocking GTP binding to γ tubulin, thus inhibiting its microtubule nucleation activity. This encouraging result has not been confirmed by an in silico analysis or verified experimentally by other groups. Therefore, we undertook not only finding a molecularlevel elucidation of the binding mode of gatastatin but also comparing its predicted binding affinity values for both α-β and γ tubulin. Specifically, the present work was aimed at identifying the binding sites and binding modes of gatastatin, a potential γ tubulin inhibitor, and its recently developed derivatives. To date, other than the published results on gatastatin, there has been no success in finding a sufficiently specific and selective small molecule agent targeting γ tubulin preferentially over α-β tubulin. This is due a high level of structural similarity between these important and highly expressed proteins. Based on a combination of in silico analysis involving gatastatin and its derivatives with respect to their binding affinities for human tubulin isotypes, we concluded that, unfortunately, none of these compounds appeared likely to have a preference for γ tubulin compared to the α-β tubulin dimer. Our computational work was supported by thermophoresis assays.