Protein adsorption by polymerized surfaces is an interdisciplinary topic that has been approached in many ways, leading to a plethora of theoretical, numerical and experimental insight. There is a wide variety of models trying to accurately capture the essence of adsorption and its effect on the conformations of proteins and polymers. However, atomistic simulations are case-specific and computationally demanding. Here, we explore universal aspects of the dynamics of protein adsorption through a coarse-grained (CG) model, that allows us to explore the effects of various design parameters. To this end, we adopt the hydrophobic-polar (HP) model for proteins, place them uniformly at the upper bound of a CG polymer brush whose multibead-spring chains are tethered to a solid implicit wall. We find that the most crucial factor affecting the adsorption efficiency appears to be the polymer grafting density, while the size of the protein and its hydrophobicity ratio come also into play. We discuss the roles of ligands and attractive tethering surfaces to the primary adsorption as well as secondary and ternary adsorption in the presence of attractive (towards the hydrophilic part of the protein) beads along varying spots of the backbone of the polymer chains. The percentage and rate of adsorption, density profiles and the shapes of the proteins, alongside with the respective potential of mean force are recorded to compare the various scenarios during protein adsorption. 1. conclusions The proposed polymer+protein model is qualitatively predicting the primary, secondary, and ternary adsorption tendencies of interacting globular proteins under certain conditions, which we explored. Using the results obtained here during variation of several relevant system parameters, one may combine the various cases to tune a system of interest after calibration, so that the final amount of adsorption will be close to the desired one, depending on the system’s requirements and the technical/chemical characteristics as well as the conditions of the surrounding environment. For example, by tuning the grafting density, the model predicts whether proteins are preferably adsorbed or not, and could insofar support experimental studies regarding the fouling/anti-fouling possibilities of a polymer coating. When designing the wanted characteristics one has to take into consideration that protein adsorption is causing crowding to the polymer coating leading to a further elongation (swelling) of the polymer chains when increasing the grafting density of the coating, as validated by our study. This swelling is energetically favorable upon overcoming a certain energy barrier; PMF curves showcase this effect for systems in which there is (i) an attraction of proteins towards the implicit wall surface (primary adsorption) or (ii) some special sites that attract the hydrophilic part of the protein (such as attractive backbone or terminal beads or ligands). The more attractive these sites are, the more intense the phenomenon and the higher the rate of secondary adsorption. For the cases of the attractive towards the proteins implicit wall, the proteins tend to accumulate close to the tethering surface. This is quantified by peak heights of their density profiles close to the surface; the peak becomes generally narrower and more pronounced when the attraction increases. The existence of these special beads along our CG polymer chains is signifying an increase to the rate and percentage of adsorption, while the presence of highly attractive backbone beads is causing some ’pulling’ of the proteins away from the attractive surface, when at the same time the height of the brush tends to slightly decrease. The attractive beads tend to ’follow’ the protein to areas closer to the wall (for the most attractive proteinwall interactions). The most extreme case where such a phenomenon is observed here is for the attractive terminal beads. We find that ligands exhibit more or less the same efficiency
as the attractive backbone beads, but with higher intensity, as adsorption is now observed for the least attractive surfaces as well. As for the hydrophobicity effect to adsorption and the effect of the size of the protein, we can state that adsorption is seen to become significantly slower as proteins tend to interact more with one another. They create small temporary protein agglomerates, which are not as easy to adsorb. In most cases studied, our proteins tend to stay globular, deviating only slightly from their near-spherical shape for the highly attractive implicit wall, with the phenomenon being more intense for the bigger proteins. To our knowledge, there are no CG molecular dynamics studies available for comparison that take into consideration protein-protein interactions, while fully atomistic studies remain unfeasible at present for several reasons [111]. There is a lattice Monte Carlo (MC) study that includes interactions among proteins. It reproduces static results similar to ours for a specific system [57]. Another MC study of the adsorption of single peptides and their aggregates [77] further validates our model causing the delay of the adsorption due to aggregation. Other than these investigations, most of the current studies either ignore the protein-protein interaction [112] or prefer to study a single protein (atomistic or CG) over a polymeric coating or a surface in general [113,114].