Efficient electrocatalysts, with high tolerance to methanol oxidation, good stability, and acceptable cost are the main requisites for promising direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) electrode materials. This target can be achieved by the integration of different active materials with unique structures. In this work, a cobalt metal–organic framework (Co-MOF) flower structure was prepared by a hydrothermal method, and then a simple ultrasonication method was employed to anchor carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in between the MOF flower petals and fabricate a Co-MOF/CNT hybrid composite. Different ratios of CNTs were used in the composite preparations, namely 25, 50, and 75 wt% of the composite. The nanocomposites were entirely investigated using different characterization techniques, such as XRD, FTIR, SEM, TEM, and XPS. Comparative electrochemical measurements confirmed that due to the integration of highly conductive CNTs with the porous active fascinating structure of Co-MOF, Co-MOF/50% CNTs exhibited improved electrocatalytic activity with a current density of 35 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0.335 V and a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The excellent electrochemical activity and stability could be due to the synergy between Co-MOF and the CNTs that conferred adequate active sites for methanol electro-oxidation and a lower equivalent series resistance, as revealed from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy study. This study opens a new avenue to decrease the utilization of platinum and increase the methanol oxidation activity using low-cost catalysts. 1. conclusions This work reports the preparation of a ower-like structure CoMOF via the solvothermal method and its combination with CNTs in different wt% through a simple sonication process. The Co-MOF/CNTs showed well-organized and stable methanol oxidation activities in an alkaline medium. The greatest electrochemical activity of the Co-MOF/50% CNTs composite over the other catalysts may be due to the existence of CNTs in the composite with fewer aggregations, higher active sites due to the open structure, and lower electrode resistance. These features endow the structure with great electronic conductivity, enhance the surface area, and facilitate ion transportation during redox reactions. Furthermore, in Co-MOF/ 50% CNTs, the acceptable percentage of CNTs, uniform distribution between Co-MOF layers, and co-existence of Co2+ and Co3+ oxidation states caused an increase in the current density from 4.5 mA cm−2 to 35 mA cm−2 at 0.335 V and a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, and improved its stability for up to 3600 s with a retention of 87.6%. Undoubtedly, the proposed strategy can be extended to open an avenue toward the synthesis of numerous composites of mixed-metallic MOFs with carbonbased material nanostructures to achieve low-cost, efficient, and stable catalysts for methanol oxidation in fuel cell applications.