Pyrola corbieri Levl has been used to strengthen bones and nourish the kidney (the kidney governs the bone and is beneficial to the brain) by the local Miao people in China. However, the functional components and neurotrophic activity have not been reported. A new acidic homogeneous heteropolysaccharide named LTC-1 was obtained and characterized by periodate oxidation, Smith degradation, partial acid hydrolysis, GC–MS spectrometry, methylation analysis, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and its molecular weight was 3239 Da. The content of mannuronic acid (Man A) in LTC-1 was 46%, and the neutral sugar was composed of L-rhamnose (L-Rha), L-arabinose (L-Ara), D-xylose (D-Xyl), D-mannose (D-Man), D-glucose (D-Glc) and D-galactose (D-Gal) with a molar ratio of 1.00:3.63:0.86:1.30:6.97:1.30. The main chain of LTC-1 was composed of Glc, Gal, Man, Man A and the branched chain Ara, Glc, Gal. The terminal residues were composed of Glc and Gal. The main chain and branched chains were linked by (1→5)-linked-Ara, (1→3)-linked-Glc, (1→4)linked-Glc, (1→6)-linked-Glc, (1→3)-linked-Gal, (1→6)-linked-Gal, (1→3, 6)-linked-Man and ManA. Meanwhile, neurotrophic activity was evaluated through PC12 and primary hippocampal neuronal cell models. LTC-1 exhibited neurotrophic activity in a concentration-dependent manner, which significantly induced the differentiation of PC12 cells, promoted the neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells, enhanced the formation of the web architecture of dendrites, and increased the density of dendritic spines in hippocampal neurons and the expression of PSD-95. These results displayed significant neurotrophic factor-like activity of LTC-1, which suggests that LTC-1 is a potential treatment option for neurodegenerative diseases. 1. conclusions by methylation analysis. The result of LTC-1 partial hydrolysis (Table S2) showed that the main chain edge monosaccharides or main chain end monosaccharides were Man, Glc and Gal; branched chain monosaccharides were mainly Ara, Man, Glc and Gal; and the core main chain monosaccharides were Man, Glu and Gal. Due to the high content of uronic acid in LTC-1, GC–MS cannot determine the type of uronic acid and its connection mode after the methylation of polysaccharides without
Molecules 2023, 28, 1544 4 of 15
reduction of uronic acid. 5. conclusions In our present study, a new polysaccharide named LTC-1 was isolated from the whole herb Pyrola corbieri Levl, which has been used for the treatment of strengthening to strengthen bones and nourish the kidney by the local indigenous people. However, LTC-1 is urgently needed to confirm its molecular structure through NMR data, it was not performed because a solvent that would dissolve it well could not be found. Meanwhile, LTC-1 demonstrated significant neurotrophic factor-like activity, increasing neurite length, enhanced the formation of the web architecture of dendrites and increased the density of dendritic spines in vitro.