conclusion, carvacrol can be a lead molecule to be considered an anti-AD or antiinsectant. Humulene epoxide II belongs to epoxides and it has been docked into AChE via hydrophobic interactions with amino acid residues in AP (Phe330) and PAS (Tyr333 and Tyr120) and AS (Trp83 and Phe329) and OH (Gly117) and acylation site (His439) (Fig. 3). In this regard, humulene epoxide II has been docked into BChE through hydrophobic interactions using amino acid residues in PAS (Tyr329) and AS (Ala325, Phe326, and Trp79) (Fig. 4). Our ADMET prediction showed that it could be crossed from GIT and BBB properly without any violations against RO5 while this heterocyclic hydrocarbon has been categorized as a class  high (Class III) toxic substance (Table 3; see Supplementary file 1) and it should be considered as an insecticidal lead molecule. Isobornyl acetate, a bicyclic monoterpenoid, has been docked with the AChE catalytic acylation site (Ser199) and acylation pocket (Phe288) and Gly118, Glyc117 of the anionic site through hydrogen bonds and it interacted with Phe329 and Trp83 of AS through hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 3). Isobornyl acetate has been also interacted with BChE using hydrophobic interactions with an anionic site weaker than that of AChE (Fig. 4). In a seminal review, Wojtunik-Kulesza and colleagues [14] introduced a bunch of monoterpenes including isobornyl acetate, camphor, carvacrol, bornyl acetate, and myrtenal, among others as phytocompounds useful to treat AD Symptoms in experimental model studies. Based on the computational findings of ToxTree, this phytocompound is readily hydrolyzed to a common terpene, possesses open-chain aliphatic with some functional groups, and is finally categorized as a class low (Class I) toxic flavoring agent with accepted ADMET which obeys RO5 (Table 3; see Supplementary file 1). Therefore, it should be considered an anti-AD lead molecule. Juniper camphor is a hardly soluble sesquiterpenoid compound which has been docked into AChE through hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl group of Ser121 and through hydrophobic interactions with PAS (Asp71 and Tyr120) and OH of the catalytic triad (Gly117), AS (Phe329 and Trp83) and catalytic site (His439) (Fig. 3). It has been docked with BChE via hydrophobic interactions with AS (Ala325 and Tyr125), PAS (Asp67 and Tyr329), and catalytic site (His433) (Fig. 4). Juniper camphor has the ability to penetrate BBB and cross GIT while it is a weak HERG inhibitor. This aliphatic homopolycyclic compound has not any sulphonate or sulphamate groups  and is considered a class  high (Class III) toxic substance, although it follows RO5. Therefore, it should be considered an insecticidal lead molecule. Benzyl valerate showed stronger BA with AChE rather than BChE. However, it bounded into BChE via hydrogen bonds (Figs. 3 and 4). It has been lodged into AS of AChE via hydrophobic interactions. This molecule can be absorbed from GIT and transferred from BBB efficiently and follow RO5 and is considered an anti-AD flavoring agent. This aromatic hydrocarbon has been categorized as a class low (Class I) toxic compound (see Supplementary file 1). Linalyl anthranilate as an aromatic monoterpenoid compound has been docked AChE (BA of -8.1 kcal/ mol) using hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl group of Ser121 and through hydrophobic interactions with AS (Trp83 and Phe329), PAS (Tyr333, Asp71, and Tyr120), OH (Gly117), AP (Phe330), and acylation site (His439 and Ser199) (Fig. 3). It has a BA of -7.6 kcal/mol with BChE using hydrogen bonding with the catalytic site (His433) and through hydrophobic interactions with amino acid residue of AS (Trp79 and Ala325) and AP and AP (Leu283) (Fig. 4). It can be absorbed from GIT, crossed BBB, and localized in lysosome while it is a week inhibitor of HERG while it followed RO5. Based on computational results of Toxtree, linalyl anthranilate is categorized as high (Class III) toxic substance possesses rings with reactive functional substituents without Na, K, Ca sulphonate and sulphamate salts which decrease its toxicity (Table 3; see Supplementary file 1). Consequently, it should be considered an insecticidal lead molecule rather than an anti-AD agent. Myrtenyl acetate as a bicyclic monoterpenoid has interacted with the catalytic site of AChE (His440) and AP (Phe330) through hydrophobic interactions while it has been docked through using hydrogen bonds with OH and AS of BChE (Figs. 3 and 4). This phytocompound has tropism to the lysosome for metabolism and penetrates BBB and crosses GIT while it is a weak HERG inhibitor that follows RO5 (Table  3; see Supplementary file 1). It can readily be hydrolyzed to a common terpene and it is an aliphatic with some functional groups and can be classified as a class low (Class I) toxic substance suitable to be considered as an anti-AD lead molecule. Myrtucommulone A as an aromatic ketone has been docked with AChE through hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl group of Arg288. It has been docked to BChE via hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl group of Glu399 and Trp516 (Figs. 3 and 4).  This phytocompound also was in second-order as an AChE binder, while its toxicity is not tolerable to be classified as an anti-AD lead-like molecule and its quantitative structure and activity relationship analysis may offer us less toxic ChE binders in future computational and experimental efforts. The ChE inhibitory effect of an essential oil containing alpha-cadinol (5%) has been reported [34]. Estragole is known as p-allylanisole and methyl chavicol is a phenylpropene with possible carcinogenic or genotoxic effects. Our findings showed that estragole is a weak binder of ChE with high toxicity. In  vitro AChE inhibitory properties of carvacrol and its derivatives have been reported [35, 36]. This study cautiously supported the dual anti-AD or antiinsectant potentials of carvacrol as a moderate ChE binder. Patuletin is a chromone that belongs to flavonols that possess potential immunosuppressive and anti-arthritic activity [37]. Patuletin has been categorized as top specific AChE binder in the present study. A spathulenol-rich extract derived from aerial parts of Anthriscus nemorosa (M. Bieb.) Spreng. (Apiaceae) has been reported as a strong AChE inhibitor [38]. The ChE inhibitory effects of terpinolene and its congeners as therapeutic agents in AD and as an antiinsectant have been reported previously (e.g., [39, 40]). According to the findings of ADMET and toxicity, benzyl valerate, bicyclic monoterpenoids (isobornyl acetate and myrtenyl acetate), monoterpene (p-cymol), and cyclic monoterpene (terpinolene) would be lead-like or even drug-like candidates with putative anti-AD activity, while the rest compounds reported here, would be considered as putative antiinsectants (vide supra). However, the bioinformatics prediction was conducted to investigate the putative interactions of myrtle phytocompounds against target proteins involved in the pathogenesis of AD (e.g., [41–43]). Finally, future investigations are requested to dig deeper into the polypharmacology of formulations and compounds of myrtle to treat AD or be employed as antiinsectants. conclusion Methyl alcohol extract of berries of MC showed overt anti-ChE activity against AChE and BChE. While the leaves of the plant itself showed less inhibitory activity on both enzymes. The in silico results were comparable with experimental findings and an array of phytochemicals found in MC including ellagic acid, esculin, patuletin, beta-chamigrene, alpha-bulnesene, beta-bourbonene and (Z)-gamma-bisabolene had more negative BA with
AChE, while ellagic acid, semimyrtucommulone, esculin, myrtucommulone A, patuletin and Juniper camphor in MC had more negative BA BChE. All compounds reported in MC showed acceptable ADMET while they were weak inhibitors of HERG therefore may lead to cardiotoxicity in large doses. This study proposed two categories of phytocompounds, namely, low class (Class I) toxic substances including beta-bourbonene, isobornyl acetate, benzyl valerate, myrtenyl acetate, p-Cymol, and terpinolene which can be used as phyto-nootropics (antiAD) for symptomatic therapy of AD or high class (class III) toxic substances including ellagic acid, esculin, alphabulnesene, myrtenyl acetate, myrtucommulone A and B, and spathulenol which can be used as antiinsectants. In sum, the most specific and strongest AChE binders derived from MC was beta-bourbonene which was marketed as a flavoring agent with permeation to the brain, however its intestinal absorption should be improved to be considered as a candidate for AD. This study categorized the pristine or natural phytocompounds of myrtle mostly as antiinsectants due to their toxic classes, however structural amendment and stereoselective synthesis like adding sulphonate or sulphamate groups to these phytocompounds may decline their toxicity and make them more suitable candidates for considering in preclinical investigations of AD. Abbreviations MC Myrtus communis L. AChE Acetylcholinesterase BChE Butyrylcholinesterase ChE Cholinesterase AD Alzheimer’s disease DTNB 5,5´-Dithiobis [2-Nitrobenzoic Acid] PDB Protein Data Bank BA Binding affinity ADMET Absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity BBB Blood-brain barrier GIT Human gastrointestinal tract HERG Human ether-a-go-go-related gene RO5 Lipinski’s rule of five OH Oxyanion hole AS Anionic subsite AP Acyl pocket PAS Peripheral anionic site