Cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (CyanoHABs) pose significant threats to human health and natural ecosystems worldwide, primarily caused by water eutrophication, increased surface water temperature, and co-occurring microorganisms. Urgent action is needed to develop an eco-friendly solution to effectively curb the proliferation of CyanoHABs. Sophorolipids (SLs) are fully biodegradable biosurfactants synthesized by Starmerella bombicola. They can be classified into lactone and acid types. The lactone type displays strong antimicrobial activity, while the acid type exhibits good solubility, which make them ideal agents for mitigating CyanoHABs. Nevertheless, the broad utilization of SLs are hindered by their expensive production costs and the absence of effective genetic editing tools in the native host. In this study, we constructed recombinant strains capable of producing either acidic or lactonic SLs using the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system. The yields of acidic and lactonic SLs reached 53.64 g/L and 45.32 g/L in a shaking flask, respectively. In a 5 L fermenter, acidic SLs reached 129.7 g/L using low-cost glucose and rapeseed oil as substrates. The addition of 5 mg/L lactonic SLs effectively degraded cyanobacteria within 30 min, and a ratio of 8.25:1.75 of lactonic to acidic SLs showed the highest degradation efficiency. This study offers a safe and promising solution for CyanoHABs treatment. 1. conclusions In conclusion, this article highlights the successful application of metabolic engineering techniques to engineer S. bombicola for the production of acidic and lactonic SLs. This study achieved the production of acidic SLs using glucose and rapeseed oil as the sole carbon sources in a 5 L fermenter. Additionally, the investigation determined the optimal ratio of lactone-type to acidic SLs for effective cyanobacterial degradation, addressing a research gap in the field. While SLs have shown potential for cyanobacterial control, their high fermentation costs have hindered large-scale implementation. Therefore, currently, SLs are primarily commercially utilized in higher-value-added detergent and cosmetic products. However, the high-yield strain and optimized fermentation process developed in this study offer significant cost reductions for sophorolipid production. It was reported that the cyanotoxin produced by Microcystis is β-cyclocitral, so the release of cyanotoxin is also a threat to water quality [30]. In reality, even without any lysing agents, the death of cyanobacterial cells can result in the release of cyanotoxin. For example, mixing SLs with clay can help sediment the cells to the bottom of the water while lysing them, utilizing the sedimentation capacity of the riverbed to reduce the contamination of cyanotoxin in the water. Additionally, the timing of using SLs to control cyanobacteria is preferably selected during months when cyanobacterial reproduction is slower, allowing for their control before a significant increase in cell proliferation occurs. Ultimately, the aim is to apply this technology on a large scale in real water bodies to mitigate the ecological damage caused by CyanoHABs and alleviate the associated water supply crises. The successful implementation of this research holds promise for reducing the detrimental effects of harmful algal blooms and safeguarding the well-being of local communities.