The lysozyme in the chicken egg white consists of various bioactive amino acids. However, these compounds are inactive when they are in the sequence of parent proteins. They become active only when isolated from these proteins. The aim of this study was to modify lysozyme with proteolytic enzymes under specific conditions of the reaction environment so as to obtain active biopeptides. The physicochemical properties of the resulting preparations were also assessed. Our study showed that the modification of lysozyme with hydrolytic enzymes (pepsin and trypsin) under strictly specified conditions resulted in obtaining biopeptide preparations with new and valuable properties, as compared with native lysozyme. After the enzymatic modification of lysozyme, two structural fractions were distinguished in the composition of the resulting preparations—the monomeric fraction and the peptide fraction. The modified lysozyme exhibited high surface hydrophobicity and high total antibacterial activity despite the decrease in the hydrolytic activity. Modification of lysozyme with hydrolytic enzymes, especially pepsin, resulted in preparations with very good antioxidative properties. 1. conclusions Our study showed that the modification of lysozyme with hydrolytic enzymes, especially pepsin (but also trypsin), under strictly specified conditions resulted in obtaining biopeptide preparations with new and valuable properties, as compared with native lysozyme. After the enzymatic modification of lysozyme, two structural fractions were distinguished in the composition of the resulting preparations—the monomeric fraction and the peptide fraction. The modified lysozyme exhibited high surface hydrophobicity and high total antibacterial activity despite the decrease in the hydrolytic activity. Our study showed that the modification of lysozyme with hydrolytic enzymes, especially pepsin, resulted in preparations with very good antioxidative properties. This is a very important and valuable achievement of our research, which will definitely increase the application potential of lysozyme modified in this way. 