The diversity of the retinal-containing proteins (rhodopsins) in nature is extremely large. Fundamental similarity of the structure and photochemical properties unites them into one family. However, there is still a debate about the origin of retinal-containing proteins: divergent or convergent evolution? In this review, based on the results of our own and literature data, a comparative analysis of the similarities and differences in the photoconversion of the rhodopsin of types I and II is carried out. The results of experimental studies of the forward and reverse photoreactions of bacteriorhodopsin (type I) and visual rhodopsin (type II) in the femtoand picosecond time scale, photo-reversible reaction of octopus rhodopsin (type II), photovoltaic reactions, as well as quantum chemical calculations of the forward photoreactions of bacteriorhodopsin and visual rhodopsin are presented. The issue of probable convergent evolution of type I and type II rhodopsins is discussed. DOI: 10.1134/S0006297923100097 conclusions Hence, it can be concluded that the similarities of type  I and type  II rhodopsins are associated with the nature of their common chromophore group, retinal, which, to a large extent, determines the mechanism of photoreaction as a key stage of RCP functioning. And the observed differences in the nature of photoreactions of type I and type II rhodopsins most likely are explained by the different isomeric form of the chromophore selected in the course of evolution in accordance with their functions. It can be suggested in the framework of convergent evolution of type I and type II rhodopsins that the similar and at the same time plastic 7-α-helical protein structures of these two types evolved independently driven by the need to optimize electronic properties of their chromophore groups in the all-trans and 11-cis isomeric forms. Similarity of the structure and mechanism of actions of such complex molecular system as retinal-containing transmembrane light-sensitive proteins is due to  the pressure of natural selection with (must be emphasized) certain physicochemical limitations. The selection itself was pursuing the most efficient function of each type of rhodopsins. 