Lutein and its cis-isomers occur in a lot of plants, including a variety of flowers. In this study, lutein isomers were produced via iodine-catalyzed isomerization, and four cis-isomers (9Z-, 9′Z-, 13Z-, and 13Z′) were isolated by means of column chromatography and semipreparative HPLC. The structures of the 9′Zand 13′Z-isomers were elucidated via NMR measurements. These compounds were used as standards for the HPLC-DAD-MS determination of the carotenoid composition of the flowers of 20 plant species, in which lutein and its geometrical isomers are the main components. The flowers showed great variation in their cisand trans-lutein content, and also in the presence or absence of other carotenoids, such as violaxanthin, neoxanthin, β-cryptoxanthin, and β-carotene. Some of the investigated flowers were found to be rich sources of lutein without zeaxanthin. 1. conclusions in this regard due to the lack of data [25]. It is generally considered that most carotenoids occur in nature as all-E isomers. However, natural Z-isomers can also be isolated. For example, Khachik et al. obtained (13Z,13′Z)-lutein from kale and marigold flowers [19]. All carotenoid isomers undergo reversible geometrical isomerization in a solution. The main mono-Z-isomers (9Z, 9′Z, 13Z, and 13′Z) of both lutein (1) and 3′-epilutein (2), as well as a di-Z-isomer (9Z,9′Z) of lutein, were prepared via the thermal and the I2-catalyzed photoisomerization of their solutions [20–22]. In 1981, our research group isolated and identified these isomers via open column chromatography on calcium carbonate, and 13C-NMR studies confirmed the existence of four mono-cis isomers at positions 9, 9′, l3, and 13′, respectively. In 2001, geometrical isomers of lutein (1) and zeaxanthin (3) were separated using hyphenated HPLC-MS and HPLC-NMR systems on a C30 column [23]. The established elution order was (13Z)-, (13′Z)-, (all-E), (9Z)-, and (9′Z)-isomer. Some years later, Aman et al. published a similar separation method via LC-NMR [24]. Only a few papers have dealt with the bioavailability and antioxidant properties of the cis-isomers of lutein. The bioaccessibility proved to be higher for the cis- than the transisomer. The antioxidant activities were also better in the case of the Z-isomers, although it is too early to draw any conclusions in this regard due to the lack of data [25]. In flower petals, although there is high diversity, some carotenoids, such as lutein (1), β-cryptoxanthin (4) (Figure S1), and zeaxanthin (3), almost always occur. These carotenoids and epoxy carotenoids, such as violaxanthin (5), antheraxanthin (6), neoxanthin (7), and lutein-5,6-epoxide (8) (Figure S1), are responsible for the characteristic yellow color of many petals. In general, the carotenoid composition of petals is different from that of leaves. The
Molecules 2023, 28, 1187 3 of 16
flower petals of most plants accumulate both β,β- and β,ε-carotenoids.  5. conclusions In conclusion, lutein and its mono-cis isomers were found to be the main carotenoids in the studied flowers. The (9Z)-, (9′Z)- and (13Z)-, (13′Z) isomers of lutein accumulated in approximately equal proportions in all but two of the examined flowers. The Anthemis tinctoria and Helichrysum italicum contained ca. 30% of (9′Z)-lutein, which was probably produced enzymatically. With the exception of the above two flowers and the Rorippa
Molecules 2023, 28, 1187 12 of 16
austriaca, the proportion of (9Z)-lutein was higher compared to (9′Z)-lutein. In four of the examined flowers, we could not detect zeaxanthin; thus, these plants could be sources of zeaxanthin-free lutein. It was also established that flowers belonging to different families may have similar carotenoid composition, and probably, that members of the same family can have different carotenoid composition.