In most carbon dioxide (CO2) capture processes, chemical absorption using an amine solvent is widely used technology; however, the solvent is prone to solvent degradation and solvent loss which leads to the formation of corrosion. This paper investigates the adsorption performance of amine-infused hydrogels (AIFHs) to increase carbon dioxide (CO2) capture by leveraging the potency of amine absorption and adsorption properties of class F fly ash (FA). The solution polymerization method was used to synthesize the FA-grafted acrylic acid/acrylamide hydrogel (FA-AAc/AAm), which was then immersed in monoethanolamine (MEA) to form amine infused hydrogels (AIHs). The prepared FA-AAc/AAm showed dense matrices morphology with no obvious pore at the dry state but capable of capturing up to 0.71 mol/g CO2 at 0.5 wt% FA content, 2 bar pressure, 30 ◦C reaction temperature, 60 L/min flow rate, and 30 wt% MEA contents. Cumulative adsorption capacity was calculated and Pseudo-first order kinetic model was used to investigate the CO2 adsorption kinetic at different parameters. Remarkably, this FA-AAc/AAm hydrogel is also capable of absorbing liquid activator that was 1000% more than its original weight. FA-AAc/AAm can be used as an alternative AIHs that employ FA waste to capture CO2 and minimize the GHG impact on the environment. 1. conclusions The FA-AAc/AAm hydrogel was synthesized via in-situ solution polymerization and hydrogel activator was infused by direct impregnation method in which the hydrogel was immersed in the water or MEA solution for 24 h. The morphology of the hydrogel featured less visible pores but demonstrated a high capacity for hydrogel activator absorption. It is suggested that the amine absorption properties of the hydrogel are also influenced by the functional groups present. The incorporation of fly ash into AIHs was found to effectively improve CO2 adsorption. At a temperature of 30 ◦C and pressure of 2 bar, the use of 0.5 wt% of FA increased CO2 adsorption by 54% compared to neat AIHs. Data from this study were best simulated by the pseudo-first order > Avrami fractional > pseudo-second order > Elovich > Weber-Morris kinetic models, as supported by the SSE value. It can be inferred that the rate of change in CO2 uptake with respect to time is directly proportional to the difference in saturation concentration and the amount of solid uptake. However, the Avrami fractional kinetic model cannot be completely disregarded due to only 0.99% difference in SSE between both kinetic models. Although the hydrogel material is stable at high temperature up to 380 ◦C, the breakthroughs analysis suggest that the adsorption of CO2 is not favorable at high temperatures. As a result, to optimize the adsorption capacity of the amine infused FA-AAc/AAm hydrogel, it is recommended to lower the flue gas temperature prior to the adsorption. Further optimization studies, such as varying the FA composition, FA particle size, type of amine solution, operational pressure, and increasing
Gels 2023, 9, 229 12 of 16
temperature, are also recommended in order to maximize CO2 capture. 4. material and methods  4.1. materials Acrylamide (analytical reagent grade) and acrylic acid (99% purity) were supplied by Merck. Ammonium peroxodisulphate (analytical reagent grade) was supplied by R&M Chemicals. N,N’-methylenebis(acrylamide) (99% purity), was purchased from SigmaAldrich. A synthesis-grade of monomers and cross-linker were used as-received without further purification. Distilled water was used throughout this research work as the polymerization medium. FA was obtained from a coal power plant located in Northern Malaysia. 4.2. preparation of mea infused fa-aac/aam hydrogel adsorbent The amine infused hydrogel was synthesized by solution polymerization using common monomers, acrylic acid (AAc) and acrylamide (AAm). The schematic illustration of synthesis process and CO2 adsorption is shown in Figure 10. The synthesis process started by diluting 5 g of AAm into 100 mL distilled water. The solution was then combined with sieved FA ranging from 0.5 wt% to 2 wt%. The stirring continued for another 20 min with temperature maintained at 60 ◦C. Then, 0.5 g of AAc and 0.05g of N,N”-methylene bisacrylamide (NMBA) as cross-linking agent were introduced to the solution while the mixture was continuously stirred. The initiator, 0.25 g of ammonium peroxodisulphate (APS) was added after 30 min. The FA-AAc/AAm hydrogel was dried at 55 ◦C for 8 h in the vacuum oven before it was infused with activator namely water, 100 wt% monoethanolamine (MEA) and 30 wt% MEA solution. Gels 2023, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 16
4. Material and Methods
4.1. Materials
Acrylamide (analytical reagent grade) and acrylic acid (99% purity) were supplied
by erck. Ammonium peroxodisulphate (analytical reagent grade) was supplied by R&M
Chemica s. N,N’-methylenebis(acrylamide) (99% purity), was purchased f om Sigma-Al-
dri h. synthesis-grade f monom rs and cross-linker were used a -rece ved without
further purification. Distilled water was used throughout this esearch work as the
polymerization medium. FA was btained from a coal power plant locat d in Northern
Malaysia. 4.2. Preparation of MEA Infused FA-AAc/AAm Hydrogel Adsorbent
The amine infused hydrogel was synthesized by solution polymerization using com-
mon monomers, acrylic acid (AAc) and acrylamide (AAm). The schematic illustration of
synthesis process and CO2 adsorption is shown in Figure 10. The synthesis process started
by diluting 5 g of AAm into 100 mL distilled water. The solution was then combined with
sieved FA ranging from 0.5 wt% to 2 wt%. The stirring continued for another 20 min with
temperature maintained at 60 °C. Then, 0.5 g of AAc and 0.05g of N,N”-methylene
bisacrylamide (NMBA) as cross-linking agent were introduced to the solution while the
mixture was continuously stirred. The initiator, 0.25 g of ammonium peroxodisulphate
(APS) was added after 30 min. The FA-AAc/AAm hydrogel was dried at 55 °C for 8 h in
the vacuum oven before it was infused with activator namely water, 100 wt% monoeth-
anolamine (MEA) and 30 wt% MEA solution. The elemental composition of raw FA was analyzed by energy dispersive XRF (X-ray
fluorescence spectrometry, Shimadzu XRF-1700, Tokyo, Japan) according to BS EN ISO
12677:2011 method. The sampling of FA was conducted by taking the FA from five differ-
ent sampling points. The FA was ground using a planetary ball mill to obtain the particle
size of less than 100 µm prior to mounting into the sample holder. Malvern Instrument Mastersizer 3000 was used to determine the particle size distri-
bution (PSD) of FA before and after the ball-mill grinding. FA samples were analyzed in
triplicates and an average result recorded. The particle refractive index and adsorption
index was set at 1.6 and 1.0, respectively. The functional groups of raw FA and the effect of incorporation of FA on the hydro-
gel matrices was determined using FTIR spectra model Perkin-Elmer Spectrum One,
FTIR-frontier. The FTIR spectra was determined at wavenumber ranges, scan number per
sample and wave resolution of 4000-500 cm−1, 16 and 4 cm−1, respectively. The hydrogel
samples were prepared using vacuum oven-dried for 5 h at 50 °C. The pellets for FTIR
analysis were prepared from a uniform mixture of hydrogel and potassium bromide
(KBR) using a steel die. KBr was used as the sample carrier because its optically transpar-
ent properties would not impose any absorbance interference to the IR ray. 4.3. characterization The elemental composition of raw FA was analyzed by energy dispersive XRF (X-ray fluorescence spectrometry, Shimadzu XRF-170 , Tokyo, Japan) ac ording to BS EN ISO 1267 :201 method. The sampling of FA was conducted by taking the FA from five different sampling points. The FA was ground sing a planetary b ll mil to ob ain the particle size of less than 100 µm prior to mounting into the sample holder. Malvern Instrument Mastersizer 3000 was used to deter ine the particle size distribution (PSD) of FA before and after the ball-mill grinding. FA samples were analyzed in triplicates and an average result recorded. The particle refractive index and adsorption index was set at 1.6 and 1.0, respectively. The functional groups of raw FA and the ffect of incorporation of FA on the ydrogel matrices wa determined using FTIR spectra model Perkin-Elmer Spectrum One, FTIRfrontier. The FTIR spectra was determin d at wavenumber ranges, scan number per sampl and wave resolution of 4000–500 cm−1, 16 and 4 cm−1, respectively. The hydrogel samples were prepared using vacuum oven-dried for 5 h at 50 ◦C. The pellets for FTIR analysis were prepared from a uniform mixture of hydrogel and potassium bromide (KBR) using a steel die. KBr was used as the sample carrier because its optically transparent properties would not impose any absorbance interference to the IR ray. Gels 2023, 9, 229 13 of 16
The microstructure of hydrogel samples was determined using Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss Evo LS15, Munich, Germany) with an energy of 10 keV at various magnification from ×60 to ×5000. The hydrogels samples were dried using a freeze dryer for 48 h to preserve the hydrogel structure. The samples were coated with a thin layer of gold to add the conductivity into the insulted hydrogel surface before analysis. The AAc/AAm, 0.5FA-AAc/AAm and CO2 loaded 0.5FA-AAc/AAm samples were put into the sample pan of a Perkin Ekmer STA6000 thermal gravimetric analyzer. Waltham, MA USA The chamber was then purged with nitrogen gas before it was heated from 20 to 600 ◦C at a heating rate of 10 ◦C/min. The system temperature, sample mass and mass derivative rate as a function of time were recorded throughout the heating process. 4.4. co2 adsorption analysis To study the influencing factors of FA-AAc/AAm hydrogel on the CO2 adsorption performance, the experiments were conducted using 10 mm inner diameter and 100 mm high adsorption column. The setup of the self-assembled CO2 adsorption column is shown in Figure 11. Firstly, 1 g of MEA infused FA-AAc/AAm was packed into the stainlesssteel column supported with glass wool on both ends. Then, the operational pressure was regulated to 2 bar and the temperature set to 30, 45 and 60 ◦C, depending on the predetermined experimental parameter. After that, the CO2 was passed into the adsorption column at a flow rate of 60 mL/min and the outlet CO2 concentration was automatically analyzed and recorded by the computer. The adsorption capacity of CO2 was calculated by the follow equation:
Q = FtcaCin
m ; tca = ∫ t 0 ( 1−Ceff Cin ) dt (4)
where, Q is the adsorption capacity (mol/g), F is inlet molar flow rate (mol/min), Cin and Ceff represent the inlet and outlet concentration and m stands for the mass of adsorbent (g). Gels 2023, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 16
The microstructure of hydrogel samples was determined using Scanning electron mi-
croscopy (SEM, Zeiss Evo LS15, Munich, Germany) with an energy of 10keV at various
magnification from X60 to X5000. The hydrogels samples were dried using a freeze dryer
for 48 h to preserve the hydrogel structure. The samples were coated with a thin layer of
gold to add the conductivity into the insulted hydrogel surface before analysis. The AAc/AA , 0.5FA-AAc/AAm and CO2 loaded 0.5FA-AAc/AAm samples were put
into the sample pan of a Perkin Ekmer STA6000 ther al gravi etric analyzer. altha ,
MA USA The chamber was then purged with nitrogen gas before it was heated from 20 to
600 °C at a heating rate of 10 ° /min. The system temperature, sample mass and mass de-
rivative rate as a function of time were recorde throughout the eating process. 4.4. CO2 dsorption Analysis
To study the influencing factors of FA- Ac/AAm hydrogel on the CO2 adsorption
performance, the experiments were conducted using 10 mm i ner diameter and 1 0 mm
high adsorption column. The setup of the self-a sembled CO2 adsorption column is shown
in Figure 11. irstl , 1 g of MEA infused FA-A c/AAm was packed into the stainless-steel
column supported with glass wool on both ends. Then, the operational pressure was reg-
ulated to 2 bar and the temperature set to 30, 45 and 60 °C, depending on the predeter-
mined experimental parameter. After that, the CO2 was passed into the adsorption col-
umn at a flow rate of 60 mL/min and the outlet CO2 concentration was automatically an-
alyzed and recorded by the computer. The adsorption capacity of CO2 was calculated by
the follow equation:
Q = FtcaCin
m ; tca=∫ (1-
Ceff Cin )dt t 0 (4)
where, Q is the adsorption capacity (mol/g), F is inlet molar flow rate (mol/min), Cin and Ceff
represent the inlet and outlet concentration and m stands for the mass of adsorbent (g). The adsorption kinetic models were used to analyze the performance of the adsor-
bent and to predict the adsorption mass transfer mechanism. Several models are available
to describe the adsorption of adsorbate on the adsorbent. Table 4 lists five these models
and their corresponding linear expressions. One commonly used model is the pseudo-
first order kinetic model, which is often employed to study the gas-solid adsorption pro-
cesses that are controlled by surface diffusion [25]. The pseudo-second order kinetic
model assumes that the rate of adsorption is limited by chemical sorption or chemisorp-
tion. The k1 in Equations (5) and (6) represents the rate constant, meanwhile k2 in Equa-
tions (7) and (8) denotes the pseudo-second order rate constant. The Weber-Morris kinetic model or also known as intra-particle diffusion model sug-
gest that the rate of adsorption is governed by the availability of active sites on the 4.5. adsorption kinetic The adsorption kinetic models wer used to analyze the performance of the adsorbent and to predict the adsorpti n mass transfer mechanism. Several models are available to describe the adsorption of adsorbate on the adsorbent. Table 4 lists five these models and their corresponding linear expressions. One commonly used model is the pseudo-first order kinetic model, which is often employed to study the gas-solid adsorption processes that are controlled by surface diffusion [25]. The pseudo-second order kinetic model assumes that the rate of adsorption is limited by chemical sorption or chemisorption. The k1 in Equations (5) and (6) represents the rate constant, meanwhile k2 in Equations (7) and (8) denotes the pseudo-second order rate constant. Gels 2023, 9, 229 14 of 16
The Weber-Morris kinetic model or also known as intra-particle diffusion model suggest that the rate of adsorption is governed by the availability of active sites on the adsorbent surface rather than concentration of adsorbate. Referring to Equations (9) and (10), kid represents the kinetic rate constant. The Elovich kinetic model was initially applied in gaseous systems to predict the mass and surface diffusion, activation and deactivation energy of the system. Referring to Equations (11) and (12), α is initial adsorption rate and β is desorption constant. The Avrami fractional kinetic model is a fractional kinetic with order one for particle nucleation and applicable for describing the adsorption of multicomponent gases by solid adsorbent [25]. In Equations (13) and (14), ka is the Avrami rate constant, and n is the Avrami exponent which use to reflect the dimensionality of crystal growth [47]. The CO2 adsorption capacity data of 30 wt% MEA infused 0.5FA-AAc/AAm hydrogel was used to fit into all these models and determine the most suitable kinetic model to explain the kinetic behavior of CO2 adsorption of MEA infused hydrogel adsorbent.