The family of chalcogenide molybdenum clusters is well presented in the literature by a series of compounds of nuclearity ranging from binuclear to multinuclear articulating octahedral fragments. Clusters actively studied in the last decades were shown to be promising as components of superconducting, magnetic, and catalytic systems. Here, we report the synthesis and detailed characterization of new and unusual representatives of chalcogenide clusters: square pyramidal complexes [{Mo5(μ3-Se)4(μ4-Se)(μ-pz)4}(pzH)5] (pzH = pyrazole, i = inner, t = terminal). Individually obtained oxidized (2+) and reduced (1+) forms have very close geometry (proven by single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis) and are able to reversibly transform into each other, which was confirmed by cyclic voltammetry. Comprehensive characterization of the complexes, both in solid and in solution, confirms the different charge state of molybdenum in clusters (XPS), magnetic properties (EPR), and so on. DFT calculations complement the diverse study of new complexes, expanding the chemistry of molybdenum chalcogenide clusters. 1. conclusions New and unusual representatives of the chalcogenide molybdenum cluster family were obtained and characterized in detail. The square-pyramidal cluster [{Mo5(µ3-Se)i4(µ4Se)i(µ-pz)i4}(pzH)t5]Br synthesized from Mo6Br12 is built by both inner chalcogenide µ3Se/µ4-Se and pyrazolate ligands and terminal pyrazole ligands. The complex is paramagnetic (15 VEC), and its properties have been studied by EPR and magnetic susceptibility experiments. Upon dissolution, the cluster oxidized by atmospheric oxygen to form [{Mo5(µ3-Se)i4(µ4-Se)i(µ-pz)i4}(pzH)t5]Br2. This compound is diamagnetic (14 VEC), and it exists in solution and in solids, which has been demonstrated in detail by a number of physicochemical methods of analysis (NMR spectroscopy, mass-spectrometry, XPS, etc.). Forms 1+ and 2+ reversibly transform into each other, as shown by cyclic voltammetry. Geometry, electronic structures, and energy levels of the new compounds was also analyzed by DFT calculations.