Donor-acceptor (D-A) type conjugated polymers are of high interest in the field of electrochromism. In this study, three novel conjugated copolymers (PBPE–1, PBPE-2 and PBPE-3) based on quinoxalino[2′,3′:9,10]phenanthro[4,5-abc]phenazine (A) as the acceptor unit and 4,8-bis((2octyldodecyl)oxy)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (D1) and 3,3-didecyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno[3,4b][1,4]dioxepine (ProDOT-decyl2, D2) as the donor units with different donor-to-acceptor ratios were successfully synthesized through Stille coupling polymerization. The polymers were then characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV), fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectoscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), spectroelectrochemistry, thermogravimetry (TG), electrochromic switching and colorimetry. Optical band gap values were calculated as 1.99 eV, 2.02 eV and 2.03 eV, respectively. The three copolymers have good solubility, distinct redox peaks, wide absorption spectra, good thermal stabilities, bright color changes and significant electrochromic switching properties. Compared to the other two copolymers, the PBPE-3 film exhibited high coloration efficiency values of 513 cm2·C−1 at 504 nm and 475 cm2·C−1 at 1500 nm. The films have the advantage of exhibiting cathodic and anodic coloration. 1. conclusions In summary, three D-A type conjugated copolymers (PBPE-1, PBPE-2 and PBPE3) based on ProDOT-decyl2 and benzodithiophene as the donor units and a new biquinoxaline compound, 5,8,14,17-tetrabromoquinoxaline [2′,3′:9,10] phenanthrene [4,5-abc] phenozine, as the acceptor unit, were successfully synthesized via Stille cross-coupling polymerization. The structure f the polymers was proven by NMR, FT-IR and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). They were characterized by different optical and electrochemical testing methods, the results of which showed that all three polymers have good electrochemical and electrochromic behaviors, showing reversibly rich and bright color changes between neutral and oxidized states. PBPE-2 had the lowest initial oxidation potential of 0.86 V, and PBPE-3 had a high coloring efficiency of up to 513 cm2·C−1. All three polymers showed definite optical contrast, cycling stability, fast response time and high thermodynamic stability. Consequently, our results indicate that cross-linked D-A type and soluble conjugated polymers can be prepared by adopting a multi-functionalized unit (four) with a bisquinoxaline structure as the acceptor unit and alkylated BDT and ProDOT unit as the donor units.