While using saccharides as stabilizers for therapeutic protein drying is common, the mechanisms underlying the stabilization during drying remain largely unexplored. Herein, we investigated the effect of different saccharides, trehalose dihydrate (TD), dextran (DEX), and hydroxypropyl β-cyclodextrins (low substitution—HP and high substitution—HPB), on the relative activities of the enzymes trypsin and catalase during miniaturized drying (MD) or spray drying (SD). For trypsin, the presence of saccharides, especially HP, was beneficial, as it significantly improved the enzyme activity following MD. The HPB preserved trypsin’s activity during MD and SD. Adding saccharides during MD did not show a notable improvement in catalase activities. Increasing TD was beneficial during the SD of catalase, as indicated by significantly increased activity. Molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations oftrypsin with HP or HPB revealed the influence of their substitution on the binding affinity for the enzyme. A higher affinity of HP to bind trypsin and itself was observed during simulations. Experimentally, activity reduction was mainly observed during MD, attributable to the higher droplet temperature during MD than during SD. The activities from the experiments and aggregation propensity from molecular modeling helped elucidate the impact of the size of protein and saccharides on preserving the activity during drying. 1. conclusions This study aimed to reveal whether different saccharides in different amounts could preserve the activity of trypsin and catalase during MD and/or SD. Our results show that during MD, the smallest saccharide TD seems to preserve the activity of the larger catalase the best. Using TD at MR and HR during MD and SD showed that it is more successful in stabilizing catalase during SD. For the smaller enzyme trypsin, the presence of
Pharmaceutics 2023, 15, 2504 16 of 19
the saccharide HPB during MD was beneficial. We observed that, of the different CDs, HPB preserved trypsin’s activity well at all ratios. However, HP successfully preserved trypsin’s activity during SD only, whereas HPB kept trypsin active during both MD and SD. The SD results showed that the MD approach could predict some of the trends observed during SD, even though the two examined drying approaches markedly differed in their dimension, configuration, scale, and speed. Therefore, using trypsin and catalase, once again, the MD approach proved to be a valuable screening technique for different formulations regarding their activity preservation capabilities before going into SD. Basically, the MD represents a “worst-case” scenario that could help to exclude specific formulations, because formulations that did not give adequate results in MD will not give adequate results in SD either. Hence, MD can serve as a prior screening tool to select SD formulations for industrial applications. The different observations with CDs during trypsin drying but not during catalase drying might suggest a dependence between size and the amount of TD needed in the case of catalase. As catalase is larger than trypsin, nearly by a factor of ~10, more TD might be required to protect this larger enzyme during drying. This confirms that the stabilization by ß-CDs during drying strongly depends on the nature of the enzymes. Molecular docking and dynamics simulations helped to understand the important interactions underlying the stabilization mechanism of trypsin by CDs. HP’s tendency to move to the hydrophobic air-water interface leads to trypsin molecules being carried away from the center, followed by activity loss. This is true for MD but not applicable to the SD of trypsin, which did not show significant activity loss. In this study, molecular modeling results showed that the higher substituted HP inhibits a higher affinity towards trypsin and itself, presenting a higher aggregation propensity. As discussed, SD results align well with these observations, but MD results do not.