The reaction of mer-(Ru(H)2(CO)(PPh3)3) (1) with one equivalent of thymine acetic acid (THAcH) unexpectedly produces the macrocyclic dimer k1(O), k(N,O)-(Ru(CO)(PPh3)2THAc)2 (4) and, concomitantly, the doubly coordinated species k1(O), k(O,O)-(Ru(CO)(PPh3)2THAc) (5). The reaction promptly forms a complicated mixture of Ru-coordinated mononuclear species. With the aim of shedding some light in this context, two plausible reaction paths were proposed by attributing the isolated or spectroscopically intercepted intermediates on the basis of DFT-calculated energetic considerations. The cleavage of the sterically demanding equatorial phosphine in the mer-species releases enough energy to enable self-aggregation, producing the stable, symmetric 14-membered binuclear macrocycle of 4. The k1-acetate iminol (C=N-OH) unit of the mer-tautomer k(O)-(Ru(CO)(PPh3)2(THAc)) (2) likely exhibits a stronger nucleophilic aptitude than the prevalent N(H)-C(O) amido species, thus accomplishing extra stabilization through concomitant k2(N,O)thymine heteroleptic side-chelation. Furthermore, both the ESI-Ms and IR simulation spectra validated the related dimeric arrangement in solution, in agreement with the X-ray determination of the structure. The latter showed tautomerization to the iminol form. The 1H NMR spectra in chlorinated solvents of the kinetic mixture showed the simultaneous presence of 4 and the doubly coordinated 5, in rather similar amounts. THAcH added in excess preferentially reacts with 2 or trans-k(O,O)-(RuH(CO)(PPh3)2THAc) (3) rather than attacking the starting Complex 1, promptly forming the species of 5. The proposed reaction paths were inferred by spectroscopically monitoring the intermediate species, for which the results were strongly dependent on the of conditions the reaction (stoichiometry, solvent polarity, time, and the concentration of the mixture). The selected mechanism proved to be more reliable, due to the final dimeric product stereochemistry. 1. conclusions By reacting 1 with one equivalent of THAcH after standing for 30 days at −20 ◦C in CDCl3, both 4 and 5 were formed. This unexpected result can be explained by postulating the intercepted intermediates as key reaction steps. The self-aggregation of the rapidly formed monohapto-acetate 2a, followed by the mutual addition of heteroleptic (N,O) produced 4. Conversely, the homoleptic chelation of 2b to form the chelated species 3 was kinetically competitive, promoting the further incorporation of the THAc ligand to produce 5. The energetic considerations calculated by DFT enabled us to interpret the mechanism through the penta-coordinated derivatives, postulated as rather low energetic transition states. The trans–cis rearrangement required the occurrence of a much higher energy barrier than the nucleophilic attack of the mer-monohapto acetate of 2 on the reciprocal Ru site, which released an apical ligand, to produce the resulting cis-P,P stereochemistry. The proposed mechanism supports the facile promotion of H to explain the tautomerization from keto-amino to iminol species, exhibiting a stronger Ru-nucleophilic reaction of the k1(O)-coordinated thymine ring by regulating the distribution of the kinetic products. The observed dynamic behavior of the particular aptitude for the transfer of H, by keeping the metallic scaffold, might suggest further tailored catalytic processes, such as isomerization, as in the case of the chelate homoleptic k2(O,O)- species [13] or novel insight into therapeutic antitumor agents for the versatile heteroleptic k2(N,O) compounds [3]. 