Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to study the molecular structure of four mediumand low-temperature heat-treated medium-rank coals. The FTIR spectral parameters, which consist of CH2/CH3, aromaticity (fa), aromatic carbon rate (fC), aromatic hydrogen rate (fH), oxygen-containing (C–O) rate (IR), organic matter maturity (M), and the degree of aromatic condensation (Dc), indicate different characteristics, including changes in the aromatic hydrocarbon structure, fatty hydrocarbon structure, hydroxyl structure, and oxygen-containing functional groups of medium-rank coal. The results show that with the increase in heat treatment temperature, the sulfur content in coal gradually decreases, but the C/H ratio gradually increases. Meanwhile, the content of kaolinite and pyrite in coal gradually decreases, whereas the content of dolomite and hematite gradually increases. With the increase in heat treatment temperature, the relative content of ether oxygen hydroxyl groups in the hydroxyl structure significantly decreases, but the relative content of self-associated hydroxyl groups increases. The relative content of alkyl ether (C–O) in oxygen-containing functional groups gradually increases, whereas the relative content of aromatic nucleus C=C vibration presents a trend of first increasing and then decreasing. In addition, –CH2– is the majority in the structure of fatty hydrocarbons, and the absorption peak intensity of asymmetric –CH3 stretching vibration increases with the increase in heat-treated temperature. The structure of aromatic hydrocarbons mainly consists of four substituted benzene rings (except for R-303.15 K), in which the relative content of the trisubstituted benzene ring decreases with the increase in heat treatment temperature. With the increase in the heat-treated temperature of medium-rank coal, Dc, fH, fC, and fa show a trend of first increasing and then decreasing, M and IR reveal a trend of first decreasing and then increasing, and CH2/CH3 present a gradually decreasing trend. In conclusion, during the increase in the heat treatment temperature of medium-rank coal, the length of the fatty side chains in the fatty hydrocarbon structure becomes shorter, the number of branch chains continuously increases, and the maturity and condensation degree of organic matter first increases and then decreases. 1. conclusions (1) With the increase in the heat treatment temperature, the sulfur content in coal gradually decreases, the C/H ratio gradually increases, and the content of kaolinite and pyrite in coal gradually decreases, but the content of dolomite and hematite gradually increases. (2) There are significant differences in the molecular structures of different heat-treated coals. The relative content of ether oxygen hydroxyl groups in medium-rank coal with high heat treatment temperature significantly decreases, while the relative content of selfassociated hydroxyl groups and cyclic hydroxyl groups increases. In addition, the relative content of methylene in the fatty hydrocarbon structure is relatively high, and the intensity of the absorption peak of asymmetric stretching vibration of methyl groups is enhanced. (3) With the increase in heat-treated temperature, the infrared spectral area of oxygencontaining functional groups presents a trend of first increasing and then decreasing. Among them, the peak area of aromatic nucleus C=C vibration is the largest (except for R-303.15 K), and its relative content presents a trend of first increasing and then decreasing, while the oxygen-containing functional groups of heat-treated coal samples basically do not contain phenolic deformation C–O (stretching). With the increase in heat treatment temperature, the relative concentrations of alkyl ether (C–O) increase. The structure of aromatic hydrocarbons mainly consists of four substituted benzene rings (except for R303.15 K). With the increase in the temperature, the relative content of the trisubstituted benzene ring decreases. (4) With the increase in heat treatment temperature, fa, f H, fc, and Dc in medium-rank coals present a trend of first increasing and then decreasing, M and IR present a trend of first decreasing and then increasing, and CH2/CH3 gradually decreases. This further indicates that the length of the fatty side chains in the fatty hydrocarbon structure of medium-rank coals becomes shorter, the number of branch chains increases continuously,
Materials 2023, 16, 6746 15 of 17
and the aromaticity and condensation degree are significantly improved. 