Influenza virus infections continue to be a significant and recurrent public health problem. Although vaccine efficacy varies, regular immunisation is the most effective method for suppressing the influenza virus. Antiviral drugs are available for influenza, although two of the four FDAapproved antiviral treatments have resulted in significant drug resistance. Therefore, new treatments are being sought to reduce the burden of flu-related illness. The time-consuming development of treatments for new and re-emerging diseases such as influenza and the high failure rate are increasing concerns. In this context, we used an in silico-based drug repurposing method to repurpose FDAapproved drugs as potential therapies against the H7N9 virus. To find potential inhibitors, a total of 2568 drugs were screened. Promacta, tucatinib, and lurasidone were identified as promising hits in the DrugBank database. According to the calculations of MM-GBSA, tucatinib (−54.11 kcal/mol) and Promacta (−56.20 kcal/mol) occupied the active site of neuraminidase with a higher binding affinity than the standard drug peramivir (−49.09 kcal/mol). Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation studies showed that the C-α atom backbones of the complexes of tucatinib and Promacta neuraminidase were stable throughout the simulation period. According to ADME analysis, the hit compounds have a high gastrointestinal absorption (GI) and do not exhibit properties that allow them to cross the blood– brain barrier (BBB). According to the in silico toxicity prediction, Promacta is not cardiotoxic, while lurasidone and tucatinib show only weak inhibition. Therefore, we propose to test these compounds experimentally against the influenza H7N9 virus. The investigation and validation of these potential H7N9 inhibitors would be beneficial in order to bring these compounds into clinical settings. 1. conclusions The newly developed drugs showed binding in the active site of NA in a highly specific binding pattern similar to that of peramivir with this in silico approach. According to our findings, some of the selected compounds occupied the active site of NA with an even higher binding affinity than peramivir. The MM-GBSA calculations showed that lurasidone and Promacta had higher binding affinity than the standard drug peramivir (−49.09 kcal/mol), with ∆Gbind values of −54.11 kcal/mol and −56.20 kcal/mol, respectively. The MD simulation studies revealed that the backbone of C-α atoms in the complexes of tucatinib and Promacta NA is stable throughout the simulation period and is not subject to significant fluctuations. In contrast, RoG analysis of the NA–lurasidone complex revealed higher fluctuations between 100 and 190 ns, affecting the complex’s stability. According to ADME analysis, the hit compounds have a high GI and do not possess properties that allow them to overcome the BBB. In silico toxicity prediction revealed that all compounds tested negative for mutagenicity and cytotoxicity. In addition, Promacta is not cardiotoxic, while lurasidone and tucatinib have only weak inhibition. Promacta and tucatinib could be used as lead compounds to combat the influenza A (H7N9) virus.