Breast cancer is a common but serious and even lethal disease. Fortunately, compared with other cancers, breast cancer treatments currently are relatively well developed. The use of specific drugs is typically essential in the majority of breast cancer treatment strategies. Given the aforementioned factors, it is important to continue researching effective antibreast cancer drug design. Machine learning-based computer-aided drug design is currently a common practice in both drug industries and academic institutes. According to the characteristics of breast cancer, we selected multiple candidate compounds; based on the corresponding molecular descriptors, biological activities, and pharmacokinetic properties, a dataset of inhibition potency and pharmacokinetic properties paired with multiple features of compounds was constructed. On this basis, the random forest method was utilized to choose greater-influenced feature embeddings; thus, 224 main operating variables were selected for further analysis; we then employed the efficient MobileNetV3 deep neural network as the backbone to establish the prediction models for the inhibition potency and pharmacokinetic properties of the compounds. After data preprocessing, the weights are obtained by training on the refined dataset. Finally, we define an optimization problem to discover compounds with the best properties. The problem is solved using the genetic algorithm with the acquired prediction model, and the solution value for the corresponding operating variables with the best clinical properties in theory is then obtained. Analysis demonstrates that our approach could be used to aid the screening process of antibreast cancer drug candidates. 1. conclusion that the upper limit of the learning rate is 0.0001 and the number of epochs is 100. 3.2. qualitative prediction model for admet properties. to simplify the problem, we trained the models separately for the five properties in ADMET. To further simplify the problem, we believe that each property has only two possibilities of “yes” or “no,” which can be expressed by the values 0 and 1. In this way, the problem can be classified as a binary classification problem; then, we can reuse the divided dataset given in Section 3.1.2 and merely change the data label to pharmacokinetic properties. Since the input data share a certain level of similarity, we still employ the MobileNetV3 structure as the backbone; therefore the desired model structure is essentially identical
to the structure described in Figure 2. The only needed minor change is to adjust the output neuron of the bottom fully connected layer and add an extra sigmoid activation function; other designs shall not be repeated here. To adapt to the binary classification problem, the model training method also needs to be adjusted. We changed the loss function to BCELoss (binary cross entropy loss), while the optimizer, learning rate adjustment strategy, and hyperparameter setup remain unchanged. The prediction accuracy is obtained based on the comparison between the predicted outputs and the real labels. During the training process based on experiments on real datasets, the issue of data imbalance has been found. To prevent the trained model from being biased due to data imbalance, we redundantly expand the data, that is, expanding the samples of a relatively small number to be roughly equivalent to the other categories. 3.3. optimization model for clinical properties based on Specific Features
3.3.1. Definition of Optimization Problem. We now define an optimization problem using these six prediction models that were trained in earlier sections, looking for the ideal circumstances for the 224 variable values that were chosen. Note that we assume that any “acceptable” compound must perform “well” at least three of the given ADMET properties; then, the problem could be defined as follows:
 4. experimental results and discussions  4.1. analysis of the biological activity prediction model. Once the network has been trained, the prediction can be made by simply feeding the network the values of the main variables. The validation set was imported into the model after establishing the quantitative neural network-based prediction model of biological activity. The predicted outcomes were compared with their real labels, which are displayed in Table 2. The change curve of the predicted value and its corresponding actual value are similar in Figure 4, which shows that the model has a decent prediction result and is able to accurately reflect the biological activity in theory. The mean square error of the model is 1.572, which is within the
acceptable range when choosing MSE to measure the prediction accuracy. 4.2. analysis of the admet property prediction model. Compare the predicted results with the actual results by importing the validation set into the trained ADMET property prediction model. The following table display the findings (Table 3). The verification results for all five attributes are acceptable as considering the aforementioned tables, while the results for HOB are a little inferior. Nevertheless, the accuracy rate is still quite good. The prediction accuracy of HOB is the lowest result in terms of these five attributes, and this fact might be caused by data imbalance, since the neural network-based models tend to develop a preference on biased data. However, our model’s average prediction accuracy is close to 85%, which is quite a satisfactory performance. 4.3. analysis of the clinical property optimizing model. by resolving the optimization problem, the optimal fitness value of 13 is discovered and the relevant actual values for the molecular descriptors are resolved. Table 4 shows the values of the first 224 molecular descriptors in detail. It can be found that due to the inconsistency of the definitions among the descriptors, the value difference is relatively large but it seems to not affect the results at last. Consider Figure 5, since the dataset that we created has a maximum fitness value of 12.86 while an optimal fitness value of 13 that could be attained by solving the problem; this fact proves that, by applying our method to existing chemical data, it might be possible to find a candidate which has better properties. 5. conclusion Breast cancer, as a common and influential disease, requires the development of new drugs to continuously improve the treatment methods. How to efficiently select possible drug
candidates to reduce the cost of drug development has a certain research value. In our work, we consider the use of machine learning methods to assist in the selection of compounds. We first used the known knowledge and computer compound molecular descriptor calculation software to construct a dataset and then used the random forest algorithm to screen the features and simplify the dataset; then, based on the MobileNetV3 structural deep convolutional network, the biological activity and pharmacokinetics were constructed. The invention of novel medications is necessary for the ongoing development of effective treatments for breast cancer, a common and notable disease. There may be some research value in how to effectively choose potential medication candidates to lower the cost of drug development. In our study, we take into account the application of machine learning techniques to aid in compound selection. First, a dataset was created by combining already known inhibition potency knowledge and the compound molecular descriptors generated by modern calculation software. Next, features were screened out and the dataset was made simpler using the random forest algorithm. Finally, the MobileNetV3 structural deep convolutional network was introduced to construct the biological activity and pharmacokinetics. A genetic algorithm solver is utilized to solve an optimization problem based on the obtained prediction model to predict the best value for the chosen molecular descriptors. The analysis from the perspective of the entire drug design process, rather than constructing or modifying each child model, reflects the proposed model’s innovation and applicability the most. The internal connection and progressive relationship of each model are emphasized in many places throughout this paper. We believe that our four-step method of influencing variable screening, biological activity prediction modeling, pharmacokinetic properties modeling, and clinical property optimization can successfully model and optimize the properties of drugs through various machine learning technologies and serve as a useful guide for drug manufacturers. According to the aforementioned analysis, our method not only offers a significant practical industrial application value but also some academic innovation and research value. For example, for the properties of hERG, we do not want the drug to be highly toxic to the human body, so for toxic compounds, we will appropriately reduce its evaluation, that is, the calculated adaptation value. Other properties are the same, and we expect to obtain antibreast cancer drugs with better efficacy and less harm to the human body through this method.