• Sewage sludge was spiked with different types of microplastic particles (MP). • Colored polyethylene spheres were routinely used as surrogate standards. • MP number and size were quantified with automated visible light microscopy & 1. conclusions The chemical structure of the investigated MP, covering the most commonly used polymer types, remained unaffected by the developed extraction protocol and morphological changes were only observed for PLA fibers. The developed sample preparation approach successfully removed easily digestible material and efficiently separated inorganic particles of higher density from the sludge digests. Surrogate standards in the form of colored PE spheres spiked to digested sludge samples during routine application, allowed the determination of sample specific recovery rates, both in terms of MP number and MP size and, as such, constitute a QA/QC quality control instrument for routine MP quantification. There is a consensus amongst scientists that harmonized and validated sample preparation protocols have to be developed to better assess MP pollution in different environmental compartments. Based on the data of this study, we argue that an assessment of sample specific recoveries is as important as validated sample preparation procedures. Often, researchers are challenged by demanding sample matrices requiring the adoption of published sample preparation schemes. It is, therefore, of key importance to have QA/QC on the individual sample level, which makes the addition of a surrogate standard mandatory. The approach described in this paper goes along these arguments and can be extended to also include particles of smaller and larger diameters. The assessment of the samples specific recoveries using automated vis microscopy requires roughly 15 min, which is negligible compared to the FPA-μ-FT-IR analysis lasting several hours. The initial screening of the samples and the determination of the specific MP recoveries, thus, will also save time as ill prepared samples can quickly be identified and do not need to be further analyzed using more time consuming analytical techniques. Our novel approach of spike-recovery experiments using colored PE spheres can be adapted to other matrices (e.g., soils, sediments, food) and may, thus, become a cornerstone for QA/QC measures for MP analysis under routine conditions