 1. conclusions about the roles of iron on Cr(VI) removal by Fe-BC would be drawn in different experiments. For example, the inhibition of Cr(VI) reduction by Fe-BC was reported due to surface coverage and oxidizing capacity of iron [12], while the shuttling effect and reduction reactivity of iron were observed to enhance Cr(VI) removal by Fe-BC [13]. Therefore, there is an urgent need for an overall investigation into the influences of various factors on Cr(VI) removal capacity by Fe-BC under identical assessment frameworks, and the associated influences of impregnated iron on biochar properties should be properly recognized. The common controlvariable experimental methods are time-consuming and costly, limiting the holistic exploration of a wide range of factors. Moreover, individual lab-scale research could hardly untangle the overall relationships in the Cr(VI) removal with one or several Fe-BC under different experimental frameworks. With the accumulation of experimental data on Cr(VI) removal by BC and Fe-BC,
machine learning (ML) can serve as an effective tool to explore the multivariate relationships by building accurate prediction models [14-16]. The ML models can also identify the relative importance and influential modes of these factors on the targets based on the rapid development of interpretable ML algorithms (e.g., random forest (RF)) [17]. Recent studies have confirmed the competence of ML in predicting the adsorption capacity of metals and organic pollutants on carbonaceous materials based on the adsorption conditions, adsorbents properties, and nature of contaminants [18-21], and mining information from the “black-box” models [19]. Nevertheless, the available ML research primarily focused on the easily accessible
macroscopic properties of BC, such as the proportion of bulk element compositions [18, 22],
while the microscopic surface characteristics (e.g., surface elemental compositions and relative proportion of different surface functional groups) were overlooked. Such microscopic information of biochar surface is undeniably critical for pollutant removal, especially for the Cr(VI) removal through the adjoint redox and sorption processes [3, 23]. It has been demonstrated that the adsorption capacity of biochar for pollutants displayed significantly higher correlation coefficients with the surface polarity (i.e., (N+O)/C) as indicated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) than the bulk polarity determined with elemental analyzer [24]. Moreover, the relative proportion of surface oxygen-containing functional groups (SOFGs, e.g., distinguishing C−O and C=O moieties) may provide more explicit information about Cr(VI) removal than the total O moiety that is collectively represented by the bulk oxygen content on biochar [25]. Another limitation of current ML models may reside in using the factors (e.g., ion exchange capacity) that are not suitable to be directly manipulated as model inputs [18], which fail to offer a detailed guidance for biochar preparation. In view of the limitations of experimental research in dealing with multifactorial
relationships, the lack of microscopic biochar properties considered in current ML studies, and our hypothesis-driven demand of exploring the impacts of iron impregnation on biochar properties, we developed new ML models with RF algorithm and literature summary in this study to: (i) predict the Cr(VI) removal capacity of pristine BC and Fe-BC based on microscopic biochar properties and reaction conditions; (ii) evaluate the direct role of the iron content in the removal capacity of Cr(VI); and (iii) estimate the indirect impact of iron on Cr(VI) removal through the variation of biochar properties including surface chemical functionalities and pore structure properties. The results of this study can provide new insights into Cr(VI)
removal by BC and Fe-BC, especially for elucidating the significance of microscopic biochar properties and the interactions between the iron and biochar phases. 2. methods  2.1. data collection Two categories of experimental data related to BC and Fe-BC were impartially collected
from the published articles (a total of 153 journal publications) over the past decade without initial bias regarding data validity, including (i) the removal capacity of pristine BC and Fe-BC for aqueous Cr(VI), and (ii) the properties comparison of Fe-BC and corresponding pristine BC after iron impregnation.  4. conclusions This study investigated the variations of biochar properties after iron impregnation and
analyzed the Cr(VI) removal capacity by BC and Fe-BC using a ML approach. Our results suggested that the direct impact of iron content on Cr(VI) removal capacity by Fe-BC was relatively low, possibly due to undistinguished Fe species in the models, but its indirect impacts were crucial. A higher O/C ratio was found in most Fe-BC after iron impregnation, which was identified as the most critical factor influencing Cr(VI) removal capacity. Based on the detailed information of SOFGs, the relative importance of C−O was higher by 19% than that of C=O
with different impact patterns on the removal of Cr(VI), and iron impregnation through postreduction could create a higher ratio of C−O to C=O in the Fe-BC. Furthermore, the carbon contents of BC and Fe-BC ranging from ~65% to ~75% could better facilitate Cr(VI) removal. As the least factor influencing Cr(VI) removal, the specific BET surface area showed that the improvement of Cr(VI) removal would be limited when SBET of BC and Fe-BC was higher than 100 m2/g. The intrinsic information behind these ML models provided a useful reference for the design of engineered biochar under different application scenarios.