The growing market of herbal medicines, the increase in international trade in Latvia, and the lack of adequate analytical methods have raised the question of the potential use of herbal fingerprinting methods. In this study, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and thin layer chromatography (TLC) methods were developed for obtaining chromatographic fingerprints of four taxonomically and evolutionary different medicinal plants (Hibiscus sabdariffa L., Calendula officinalis L., Matricaria recutita L., Achillea millefolium L.). Retention time shifting, principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA), and orthogonal projections to latent structures (OPLS) analysis were used to improve and analyze the obtained fingerprints. HPLC data detection at 270 nm was determined superior to 360 nm for the distinction of medicinal plants and used data alignment method significantly increased similarity between samples. Analyzed medicinal plant extracts formed separate, compact clusters in PCA, and the results of HCA correlated with the evolutionary relationships of the analyzed medicinal plants. Herbal fingerprinting using chromatographic analysis coupled with multivariate analysis has a great potential for the identification of medicinal plants as well as for the distinction of Latvian native medicinal plants. 1. 4. conclusions The herbal fingerprinting method has a great potential for the identification and characterization of herbal extracts. Research shows clear differences in chemical fingerprints of Latvian native medicinal plants (chamomile, calendula, and yarrow) and roselle. TLC can be used as an initial screening tool of herbal extracts, while HPLC gives much more detailed information regarding the chemical composition of herbal extracts. HPLC fingerprint similarity can be greatly improved by adjusting retention times to the average chromatogram of each medicinal plant. In HPLC data, detection at 270 nm is superior to 360 nm and provides more detailed results of the chemical composition of herbal extracts and can be used to identify and differentiate medicinal plants. The correlation between the phylogenetic relationships and groupings of fingerprint datasets of analyzed medicinal plants was confirmed. The developed HPLC method in conjunction with chemometrics can also be used to identify components of mixed extracts containing different combinations of analyzed medicinal plants.