The pnictogen bond, a somewhat overlooked supramolecular chemical synthon known since the middle of the last century, is one of the promising types of non-covalent interactions yet to be fully understood by recognizing and exploiting its properties for the rational design of novel functional materials. Its bonding modes, energy profiles, vibrational structures and charge density topologies, among others, have yet to be comprehensively delineated, both theoretically and experimentally. In this overview, attention is largely centered on the nature of nitrogen-centered pnictogen bonds found in organic-inorganic hybrid metal halide perovskites and closely related structures deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) and the Inorganic Chemistry Structural Database (ICSD). Focusing on well-characterized structures, it is shown that it is not merely charge-assisted hydrogen bonds that stabilize the inorganic frameworks, as widely assumed and welldocumented, but simultaneously nitrogen-centered pnictogen bonding, and, depending on the atomic constituents of the organic cation, other non-covalent interactions such as halogen bonding and/or tetrel bonding, are also contributors to the stabilizing of a variety of materials in the solid state. We have shown that competition between pnictogen bonding and other interactions plays an important role in determining the tilting of the MX6 (X = a halogen) octahedra of metal halide perovskites in one, two and three-dimensions. The pnictogen interactions are identified to be directional even in zero-dimensional crystals, a structural feature in many engineered ordered materials; hence an interplay between them and other non-covalent interactions drives the structure and the functional properties of perovskite materials and enabling their application in, for example, photovoltaics and optoelectronics. We have demonstrated that nitrogen in ammonium and its derivatives in many chemical systems acts as a pnictogen bond donor and contributes to conferring stability, and hence functionality, to crystalline perovskite systems. The significance of these non-covalent interactions should not be overlooked, especially when the focus is centered on the rationale design and discovery of such highly-valued materials. 1. conclusions section. The nitrogen bond, or a covalently bound nitrogen-centered pnictogen bond, in chemical systems occurs when there is evidence of a net attractive interaction between the electrophilic region associated with a covalently or coordinately bound nitrogen atom in a molecular entity and a nucleophile in another, or the same, molecular entity. It is the first member of the family of pnictogen bonds formed by the first atom of the pnictogen family, Group 15, of the periodic table, and is an inter- or intra-molecular non-covalent interaction [10]. The possible occurrence of pnictogen bonds in many crystal lattices, formed by covalently bound nitrogen [10,33], phosphorous [33,35], arsenic [33,34], antimony [36] and bismuth [37], has already been discussed recently. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 8816 4 of 61 Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 66
 7. conclusions This overview focused on several crystal structures, formed between various organic and inorganic moieties, to reveal the frequent existence of nitrogen-centered charge-assisted pnictogen bonding interactions; these have been largely overlooked in the metal halide perovskite literature. Since our motivation was to draw attention to the occurrence of this type of interaction in crystals, we examined its chemical manifestations. Our review of crystals structures deposited in the CSD suggests that N in ammonium derivatives is a potential pnictogen bond donor, and is, in part at least, responsible for the stability and functionality of many organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite systems, and hence could be exploited in the design of novel materials for photovoltaics, photocatalysis and other optoelectronics. Our analysis suggests that the ammonium parts of mono-, bi- and multi-functional organic cations interact attractively with halogen atoms of the inorganic counterparts of the metal halide perovskites in two ways. Firstly, the N atom forms directional pnictogen bonding interactions with the bridging halogen sites of the MX6n− octahedra of the inorganic counterpart. Secondly, the H atoms form hydrogen bonding interactions either with the bridging halogens and/or terminal halogen atoms, depending on the architectures of the organic cations and inorganic anions. Based on the spatial orientation of the organic cation, an additive, a single H-atom in the ammonium fragment could sustain an attractive engagement with at least two halogen atoms of the inorganic octahedra, thus forming a bior tri-furcated interaction bonding topology. In cases where one of the terminal sites of the organic cation is –H, –X, or –CH3, the formation of charge-assisted H···X hydrogen bonding, or X′···X halogen bonding, or H···X/C···X hydrogen/tetrel bonding interactions between the organic cation and inorganic metal halide anion framework is a likely outcome. These, together with the attractive engagements driven by the ammonium part of the organic cation, act as forces that hold the layered inorganic framework together in low dimension and hence provide stability to the overall geometry of the organic-inorganic metal halide compounds. The tilting of the MX6 octahedra of the inorganic framework in halide-based perovskites is often found to be driven by the competition between N···X pnictogen bonding, H···X hydrogen bonding and together with, when they occur, other non-covalent interactions. This attribute is shown through several illustrative crystal systems, including, for instance, orthorhombic MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) systems in 3D (Figure 4), and those shown in Figures 14–16, Figures 18–20 in 2D.this study was very large owning to the dominance of coulombic interactions involved, the empirical relationship known between potential energy density at the bcp and interaction energy allowed us to suggest that pnictogen bonds explored in these models were locally of weak-to-medium strength, and hence their contribution to the crystal stability should be not overlooked. However, it should be kept in mind that the intermolecular interaction energies estimated from intermolecular bond critical point properties of electron densities could be inherently unreliable, since they typically underestimate, but sometimes overestimate, more reliable values. Conclusions drawn regarding the energetic importance of specific intermolecular interactions based on this empirical relationship can be misleading, especially in the context of crystal packing and crystal engineering [175]. These interactions appeared persistently regardless of whether the geometry of the ion-pair in the crystal, or optimized with MP2 and DFT, was used for QTAIM analysis; their feasibility in the ion-pair was also confirmed by NBO’s second order analysis. Although it is not straightforward to quantify the energetic strength of each of the interaction types in each crystal system illustrated in this study, even with detailed computational studies, the simple model systems presented at the beginning of this overview may be considered for investigation using state of the art energy decomposition procedures, such as Interacting Quantum Atom Model, to quantify the strength of each of the interactions involved. In addition, charge density approaches (viz. ELF, RDG and QTAIM) may also be applicable to most of the crystal systems to explore the nature of various interlayer interactions that occur in the low dimensional crystal systems. These approaches allow one to visualize the nature of electron density localization, delocalization and depletion, among others.