Many algae synthesize compounds that have exceptional properties of nutraceutical, pharmacological, and biomedical interest. Pigments, fatty acids, phenols, and polysaccharides are among the main compounds investigated so far. Polysaccharides are the most exploited compounds, widely used in pharmaceutical, food, and chemical industries, which are at present entering into more advanced applications by gaining importance, from a therapeutic point of view, as antioxidant, antimicrobial, antitumor, and immunomodulatory agents. Establishing algae as an alternative supplement would complement the sustainable and environmental requirements in the framework of human health and well-being. This review focuses on the proprieties and uses of the main microand macroalgae metabolites, describing their potential for application in the different industrial sectors, from food/feed to chemical and pharmacological. Further, current technologies involved in bioactive molecule extraction strategies are documented. 1. conclusions and perspective Algae are turning into one of the most attractive natural sources for various categories of primary and secondary metabolites with a wide range of possible applications. These compounds, characterized by bio-activity, can be both health-promoting and diseasesuppressing; hence, they can be used as dietary supplements in food and as therapeutic adjuvants for the management of many different diseases. Polyunsaturated fatty acids, polysaccharides, carotenoids, phycobiliproteins, and other metabolites are only some of the many metabolites that have been tested in clinical and pharmacological studies. In the last decades, there has been a surge in demand for healthier, more natural, sustainable products to bio-fortify food, boost the immune system without the need for drugs, replace synthetic antibiotics with novel compounds already present in nature, and have the same or higher efficacy against antibiotic resistance pathogens. Algae are one of the best approaches to addressing nutritional deficiencies of many foods and feeds and a promising alternative to animal sources for vegetarian and vegan consumers. However, although numbers of algal bioactive molecules are commercially available and tested, the social acceptance of health benefits is still uncertain [54]. Macroalgae present advantages over microalgae due to the lower cost of cultivation, especially in the offshore set, which prevents the utilization of land, and do not compete with agriculture crops, and to the high amount of achievable biomass. Additional nutrients are not generally needed; the carbon footprint is negligible and limited to the biomass processing steps, as well as the risk of eutrophication of aquatic systems, making macroalgae production and environmentally-friendly exploitation. Moreover, due to their high capacity for carbon fixation, macroalgae have the potential to act as bioremediators of eutrophic coastal waters. At present, the main concern is to prevent the overexploitation of wild macroalgae stocks by reducing the environmental pressure caused by the growing demand for this natural resource. This goal can be achieved by efficient aquaculture systems providing controlled or standardized products with a nutritional profile comparable to that of the wild stock, with minimum variation along the seasons. Microalgae present advantages over macroalgae due to the abundance of bioactive compounds already tested in many years of research and investigation. The main applications of microalgae aquaculture have always been (and still are) as feed for the growth of larvae and juvenile shellfish and finfish, to increase their nutritional value, and to improve survival and immune defenses. These effects are also increasingly exploited for human health. In the clinical daily routine, the most important expected progress in this field would be an increased use of algal polysaccharides such as alginate gels as wound healing, antiulcer agents, and the β-glucans (paramylon nanofibers) as immunostimulants. These molecules, like all other bioactive compounds of algal origin, would be best utilized when novel extraction and purification methodologies are developed to allow sustainable, cost-effective industrial utilization [15]. So far, the limitations of developing industrial algae biotechnology are mainly represented by the high downstream process and bio-refinery costs of the biomass, which can account for up to 50–80% of the whole amount.