In recent years, unsupported MoS2-based catalysts have been reported as promising candidates in the hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) of bio-oil. However, preparing MoS2-based catalysts with both high activity and good stability for HDO reaction is still challenging and of great importance. Hence, this mini-review is focused on the recent development of unsupported MoS2-based HDO catalysts from the understanding of catalyst design. The three aspects including morphology and defect engineering, metal doping, and deactivation mechanism are highlighted in adjusting the HDO performance of MoS2based catalysts. Finally, the key challenges and future perspectives about how to design efficient catalysts are also summarized in the conclusions. morphology and defect engineering MoS2 is a typical two-dimensional layered compound, which has two morphology parameters of slab length and layer number (Figure 1D). These two parameters could be visualized by highresolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) observation from the length and number of black fringes in the HRTEM images, respectively (Lai et al., 2016; Cao et al., 2021b). For unsupported MoS2-based catalysts, it is important to boost the number of active sites by increasing the Mo dispersion. Hence, shortening the slab length or decreasing the layer number of MoS2 can both improve its HDO activity. Due to the weak Van der Waals force between the adjacent layers, MoS2 can be easily exfoliated into few-layer or even single-layer nanosheets by some physical or chemical methods (Zhu et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2021c). A simple and effective hydrazine-assisted liquid exfoliation method was developed to exfoliate the commercial MoS2 to few-layer nanosheets (Liu et al., 2016). The HDO activity was remarkably enhanced for few-layer MoS2 nanosheets due to the exposure of more active surface sites. In addition, the layer number of bulk MoS2 was further decreased to monolayer by n-butyllithium exfoliation, and the conversion was extraordinarily improved from 25.8% of bulk MoS2 to 98.7% of single-layer MoS2 in the HDO of 4-methylphenol (Liu et al., 2017). This result demonstrates that preparing few-layer, especially monolayer MoS2 is an effective way to design highly efficient HDO catalysts. Various methods have been developed to synthesize unsupported MoS2 catalysts such as hydrothermal (Cao et al., 2021a; Zhang C. et al., 2021), ball milling (Wang C. et al., 2014), thermal decomposition (Yi et al., 2011), and solution method (Genuit et al., 2005). Among the abovementioned methods, the hydrothermal method is most widely used due to the advantages of simple operation and controllable morphology of the product. In the hydrothermal procedure, temperature, pH value, and surfactants showed a great effect on the morphology of the MoS2 product. For example, an acidic environment in the hydrothermal process was helpful to facilitate the nucleation and prepare smaller MoS2 particles, thus resulting in enhanced activity in the HDO of p-cresol (Wang et al., 2015b; Zhang C. et al., 2018). A higher initial synthesis temperature could promote fast nucleation and shorten the MoS2 slab length (Zhang et al., 2015). Co(thiourea)4 2+. The EXAFS and HAADF-STEM characterization results confirmed that single Co atoms were covalently bonded to the sulfur vacancies on the basal planes to form a new Co-S-Mo active phase (Liu et al., 2017). The theoretical calculation results showed that the proximal sites around Co-S-Mo were energetically favorable for the formation of sulfur vacancies, thus making Co-SMoS2 an extremely active and selective catalyst in the HDO reactions. Meanwhile, superior stability was also observed due to the low operating temperature at 180°C. An in situ interfacial reactions was adopted to prepare MoS2-x catalyst supported by Co nanoparticles (Co NPs-MoS2) based on the reducibility of defection-rich MoS2-x (Wu et al., 2020). conclusion and future perspectives In this mini-review, we summarized the recent progress of unsupported MoS2-based catalysts in the HDO of bio-oil. Reducing the layer number of MoS2, especially to a singlelayer could significantly improve the HDO activity. Creating defects within the basal planes is also an effective way to enhance the HDO activity, especially for metal-promoted MoS2 catalysts because it provides additional anchoring sites. The regulation of HDO selectivity is easily realized by just adjusting the layer number of MoS2. Co and Pt doping can both significantly improve the HDO activity and stability of MoS2 catalysts, while Co-promoted catalysts are more potential due to the minimized H2 consumption. Four different active phases including Co-Mo-S, CoS2-MoS2, Co-SMo, and Co NPs-MoS2 have been proposed to construct highly efficient CoMo bimetallic catalysts. Sulfur loss and coking are the main factors to cause deactivation, which could be alleviated by co-feeding of sulfiding agents, surface hydrophobic treatment, and lowering the reaction temperature.