The rapid development of biogas plants in China has generated large quantities of digestate. The disparity between the continuity of biogas plant operation and the seasonality of digestate utilization has led to the need to store digestate. Therefore, untargeted profiling of bioactive compounds in the digestate stored under aerobic and anaerobic conditions was performed. The antioxidant and antifungal activity of digestate stored under varying conditions was likewise assessed. The results delineated that digestate storage under varying conditions brought about the degradation of organic acids, alkenes, aldehydes, alcohols, ketones, ethers, amino acids and their derivatives, and esters, leading to the stabilization of digestate components. Together, these new data revealed that digestate storage for up to 20 days under aerobic conditions promotes glycine, serine, and threonine degradation pathways and enhances biotin and vitamins production. In contrast, anaerobic storage enhances the taurine and hypotaurine metabolic pathways and increases the derivation of antimicrobial substances, such as indole alkaloids. Moreover, digestate storage under anaerobic conditions promotes antioxidant and antifungal activity more than storage under aerobic conditions. These findings can contribute to the future development of high-value agricultural products from digestate and the sustainability of biogas plants. 1. conclusions Untargeted metabolomics profiling in digestate stored at varying temperatures (4 ◦C, 20 ◦C, and 30 ◦C) and time (0 to 80 days) under aerobic and anaerobic conditions was performed. The antioxidant and antifungal activity of digestate stored under varying conditions was also evaluated. The results showed that the degradation rate increased with an increase in storage duration. The maximum number of metabolites was detected after 80 days of storage, irrespective of the temperature and mode (aerobic and anaerobic). Moreover, around 49 metabolic pathways of metabolite generation were observed for digestate stored under anaerobic conditions, while 40 metabolic pathways were detected in digestate stored under aerobic conditions. The maximum antioxidant and antifungal activity (82.15 ± 9.5 µmol/L Trolox and 89.81 ± 5.13%, respectively) were recorded for digestate stored at 20 ◦C for 20 days under aerobic conditions. This study also showed that metabolomics can be an innovative and promising approach to elucidate the derivation pathways of metabolites and provide new perspectives for a further analysis of digestate under varying storage conditions.