Water pollution due to textile dyes is a serious threat to every life form. Bacteria can degrade and detoxify toxic dyes present in textile effluents and wastewater. The present study aimed to evaluate the degradation potential of eleven bacterial strains for azo dye methyl red. The optimum degradation efficiency was obtained using P. aeruginosa. It was found from initial screening results that P. aeruginosa is the most potent strain with 81.49% degradation activity and hence it was subsequently used in other degradation experiments. To optimize the degradation conditions, a number of experiments were conducted where only one variable was varied at a time and where maximum degradation was observed at 20 ppm dye concentration, 1666.67 mg/L glucose concentration, 666.66 mg/L sodium chloride concentration, pH 9, temperature 40 ◦C, 1000 mg/L urea concentration, 3 days incubation period, and 66.66 mg/L hydroquinone (redox mediator). The interactive effect of pH, incubation time, temperature, and dye concentration in a second-order quadratic optimization of process conditions was found to further enhance the biodegradation efficiency of P. aeruginosa by 88.37%. The metabolites of the aliquot mixture of the optimized conditions were analyzed using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR), GC-MS, proton, and carbon 13 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopic techniques. FTIR results confirmed the reduction of the azo bond of methyl red. The Gas Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) results revealed that the degraded dye contains benzoic acid and o-xylene as the predominant constituents. Even benzoic acid was isolated from the silica gel column and identified by 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy. These results indicated that P. aeruginosa can be utilized as an efficient strain for the detoxification and remediation of industrial wastewater containing methyl red and other azo dyes. 1. conclusions The aim of this study was to assess the biodegradation potential of P. aeruginosa for methyl red. The chosen bacterial strain degraded the textile azo dye methyl red more effectively. The optimal conditions determined were 3 days incubation time, 40 ◦C temperature, 20 ppm concentration of dye, pH 9, 1666.67 mg/L glucose concentration, 1000 mg/L urea concentration, 666.66 mg/L NaCl, and hydroquinone (redox mediator) at the concentration of 66.66 mg/L in a one-at-a-time factor optimization. The optimal conditions of pH, incubation time, temperature, and dye concentration influenced the maximum degradation of methyl red in a second-order quadratic model. The spectroscopic techniques FTIR, GCMS, and FTIR were used to characterize the metabolites formed under these optimal conditions. The spectroscopic data demonstrated that bacteria degraded the corresponding
dye to benzoic acid and o-xylene by subsequent enzymatic actions. It was revealed that the significant metabolites were benzoic acid and o-xylene. The azo linkage of the methyl red dye was broken by enzyme azoreductase of the bacterial system, leading to the formation of 2-aminobenzoic acid ring and N,N-dimethylaminobenzene. Benzoic acid was formed by bacterial enzyme azo reductase reducing the azo linkage of methyl red dye, then followed by the deamination and then reduction of the 2-aminobenzoic acid ring. The other part of the dye molecule N,N-dimethylaminobenzene was converted to N,N-dimethyl benzene by deamination reaction. The deamination and later reductive demethylation of N,N-dimethyl benzene transformed it to aniline. Bacterial enzyme deaminase by deamination action changed the aniline molecule to benzene. After subsequent demethylation, benzene was converted to o-xylene. The effective degradation of methyl red was optimal using P. aeruginosa; therefore, it can be utilized as a suitable bacterial strain for the degradation of methyl red and other azo dyes. Some limitations are connected with biodegradation of dyes using P. aeruginosa, such as high concentration of dyes and lack of suitable physiochemical and environmental conditions. So, these conditions should be considered during the degradation study.