Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most common aggressive, resistant, and invasive primary brain tumors that share neurodegenerative actions, resembling many neurodegenerative diseases. Although multiple conventional approaches, including chemoradiation, are more frequent in GBM therapy, these approaches are ineffective in extending the mean survival rate and are associated with various side effects, including neurodegeneration. This review proposes an alternative strategy for managing GBM and neurodegeneration by targeting heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90). Hsp90 is a well-known molecular chaperone that plays essential roles in maintaining and stabilizing protein folding to degradation in protein homeostasis and modulates signaling in cancer and neurodegeneration by regulating many client protein substrates. The therapeutic benefits of Hsp90 inhibition are well-known for several malignancies, and recent evidence highlights that Hsp90 inhibitors potentially inhibit the aggressiveness of GBM, increasing the sensitivity of conventional treatment and providing neuroprotection in various neurodegenerative diseases. Herein, the overview of Hsp90 modulation in GBM and neurodegeneration progress has been discussed with a summary of recent outcomes on Hsp90 inhibition in various GBM models and neurodegeneration. Particular emphasis is also given to natural Hsp90 inhibitors that have been evidenced to show dual protection in both GBM and neurodegeneration. 1. conclusions and future prospective Given disease complexity and heredity, many complex diseases share similar pathways and molecular targets which are common to each other, and consequently, targeting drugs on these pathways shares broad-spectrum activity [296]. As an illustration of the therapeutic influence of anticancer drugs on NDDs, consider that patients with breast cancer who
undergo chemotherapy have a significantly reduced risk of developing AD in old age [297]. This finding suggests that anticancer drugs may help treat NDDs like AD due to the same signaling pathways between the two diseases [298]. Similarly, Hsp90 could be another potential example of a single target that can be targeted in multiple diseases, especially in both GBM and neurodegeneration. Considering the aggressive nature of GBM and dismal prognosis, it is essential to investigate any or all factors that may be allowing these cells to survive despite therapy. As discussed above, Hsp90 and its client proteins have become validated as a novel drug target for GBM and other cancer treatments in both single and combination therapy since Hsp90 involves several molecular signalings of tumorigenesis, including apoptosis, proliferation, angiogenesis, migration, invasion, and metastasis. Similarly, many of the Hsp90 client proteins are involved in maintaining the degenerative condition in the neuron during any pathological insult. Indeed, targeting Hsp90 in neurodegeneration provides neuroprotection in dual ways, such as reducing the accumulation of misfolded protein aggregates by enhancing chaperone functions and inhibiting abnormal neuronal protein activity through alleviating protein hyperphosphorylation and consequent aggregation. These reports suggest that Hsp90 inhibition could improve the survivability of GBM patients while maintaining significant neuroprotection as a common target of cancer and neurodegeneration. More than 50 clinical trial studies have been conducted to treat various cancers using Hsp90 inhibitors, but none of the studies has been focused on GBM or neurodegenerative diseases. However, combining Hsp90 inhibitors with standard GBM therapies like TMZ or radiation shows promise as a therapeutic strategy, with encouraging outcomes in in vitro/in vivo studies, suggesting further studies in various clinical settings. Many clinical studies using Hsp90 inhibitors are also halted in the phase 1 trials due to toxicity, side effects, and reduced efficacy. As the therapeutic benefits of Hsp90 inhibitors depend on the non-toxic doses, an optimum dose should be determined with maximum effect, yet non-toxic, BBB penetrating and can use in long-term administration schedules. This requires many preclinical studies and more drug development efforts utilizing existing drugs and potential natural products. From identifying the first Hsp90 inhibitors, natural products have been a promising source for developing potential inhibitors for Hsp90, from where several novels fully and semi-synthetic Hsp90 inhibitors are developed and advanced in clinical trials. As discussed above, many natural compounds targeting Hsp90 are promising in GBM and various neuronal injuries.