Spirocycles represent a diverse class of molecules which have received significant attention in the pharmaceutical industry due to their broad biological activities and inherent molecular three–dimensionality. Herein, we demonstrate a procedurally simple method for the preparation of a range of spirocyclic dihydropyrazoles. The protocol utilises bench stable cyclic tosylhydrazones, which are trivial to prepare from the parent cyclic ketone without need for purification, and commercially available electron deficient alkenes. The synthetic utility of the core scaffold is also demonstrated to highlight potential for applications in medicinal chemistry and drug development programmes. organic & biomolecular chemistry PAPER
Cite this: Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 2255
Received 14th January 2022, Accepted 31st January 2022
DOI: 10.1039/d2ob00093h
rsc.li/obc
Synthesis of spirocyclic dihydropyrazoles from tosylhydrazones and electron-deficient alkenes†
Timothy L. Wootton and Daniel M. Allwood *
Spirocycles represent a diverse class of molecules which have received significant attention in the
pharmaceutical industry due to their broad biological activities and inherent molecular three–dimension-
ality. Herein, we demonstrate a procedurally simple method for the preparation of a range of spirocyclic
dihydropyrazoles. The protocol utilises bench stable cyclic tosylhydrazones, which are trivial to prepare
from the parent cyclic ketone without need for purification, and commercially available electron deficient
alkenes. The synthetic utility of the core scaffold is also demonstrated to highlight potential for appli-
cations in medicinal chemistry and drug development programmes. conclusion In summary, we report a procedurally simple method for formation of highly three-dimensional spirocyclic dihydropyrazole building blocks bearing functionality for further synthetic elaboration. These pharmaceutically-relevant compounds are formed from commercial electron-deficient alkenes and bench-stable tosylhydrazones, which are trivial to synthesise from their respective parent ketones in high yields without purification. A versatile substrate scope is reported, including stable 4- and 5-membered rings at the spirocyclic junction. These building blocks represent a valuable addition to the arsenal of core structures for medicinal chemistry applications. author contributions TLW – Investigation, methodology, data curation, formal analysis, validation, visualisation, writing – original draft. DMA – Funding acquisition, conceptualisation, investigation, methodology, data curation, formal analysis, supervision, validation, visualisation, writing – review and editing. conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare. Scheme 7 Isolated yields from reaction of 1a with a range of different alkenes. Reaction conditions: 1a (1.0 mmol), alkene (1.5 equiv. ), CsF (1.5 equiv. ), dried DMSO (4 mL), 110 °C, 22 h, sealed vial, N2 atmosphere. aDiethyl fumarate used as alkene. bDiethyl maleate used as alkene. Scheme 8 Exploration of the synthetic utility of model spirocyclic dihydropyrazole 5a. Reaction conditions: (a) NEt3 (2.0 equiv. ), DMAP (0.1 equiv. ), Boc2O (1.1 equiv. ), CH2Cl2, RT, 12 h, 59%. (b) 5% KOH (18.0 equiv. ), MeOH, reflux, 72%. (c) BnNH2 (2.0 equiv. ), MeOH, 60 °C, 12 h, 75%. (d) NaBH4 (2.0 equiv. ), MeOH, RT, 12 h, 30%. 27–30
Scheme 9 One-pot transformation of the parent ketone 11 into compound 5a on a gram scale. organic & biomolecular chemistry paper