conclusions In this work, the properties of systems of hard spheres that are tethered to an FCC lattice are examined. The tethered hard sphere model gives us detailed information of the structure of phase space, and more specifically the behavior of the entropy, around the point where the configuration is tethered. The phase space of the system can be considered to be a porous material, with the pores corresponding to the regions accessible to the system, and the pore walls corresponding to the disallowed regions due to overlap of spheres or violation of the tether constraint. The “pore volume” of phase space is directly related to the entropy of the system, while its “porosity” is directly related to the excess entropy of the system. The collision rates of the particles with their tethers give an indication of the pathways away from the perfect FCC configuration. At low to moderate fluid densities, the porosity of phase space appears to be fairly uniform moving away from the perfect FCC configuration to the regions of phase space corresponding to the more disordered fluid phase. The tether collision rates gradually decrease to eventually reach the value for the ideal tether mode, while the particle–particle collision rates gradually increase from zero to the bulk fluid value. At the higher solid densities, the FCC configuration becomes isolated from the rest of the phase space by excluded volume interactions. The system becomes “trapped” in the FCC configuration. Moving away from the perfect FCC lattice (by increasing the tether length), the particle–particle collision rate increases from zero to the values for the bulk, untethered system; however, the tether collision rate decreases exponentially with the tether length and then suddenly drops to zero. At intermediate densities, there is a “bottleneck” separating the phase space corresponding to the FCC configuration and that of the disordered, fluid phase. The tether collision rate drops rapidly to low values as the tether length increases, before jumping up to the ideal tether rate. The particle–particle collision rate first increases to a value corresponding to solid phase, but then later switches to the fluid phase value, sometimes transitioning back and forth between the two before settling to the fluid value. This change in the pathways out of the FCC configuration leads to the entropy developing a path dependence, and this can be represented as a region in rT/a and ρσ3 where the entropy is nonanalytic. This region extends at extremely large tether lengths from the solid–fluid coexistence region of the untethered hard sphere system and ends at a tether length rT/a ≈ 0.55 and a density slightly lower than the density at the onset of freezing. The direct geometric interpretation of the tether and particle–particle collision rates can be used to determine the entropy
of the system: by integrating the particle–particle collision rate with respect to the system density or by integrating the tether collision rate with respect to the tether length. As long as both these paths do not cross this non-analytic region, they will lead to consistent results. If either path does cross the non-analytic region, the discrepancy between the two methods will depend on what portion of the non-analytic region is enclosed by the path.