 citation for published version: Lin, K, Li, Q, Yu, R, Chen, J, Attfield, JP & Xing, X 2022, 'Chemical pressure in functional materials', Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 51, no. 13, pp. 5351-5364. https://doi.org/10.1039/d1cs00563d
Digital Object Identifier (DOI): 10.1039/d1cs00563d link: Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version: Peer reviewed version
Published In: Chemical Society Reviews general rights Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s) and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. take down policy The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim. Download date: 25. Jan. 2024
Tutorial reviews
Please do not adjust margins
Received 00th January 20xx, Accepted 00th January 20xx
DOI: 10.1039/x0xx00000x
Chemical pressure for synthesis of functional materials
Kun Lina, Qiang Lia, Runze Yua, Jun Chena, and J. Paul Attfieldb,*, Xianran Xinga,*
Chemical pressure, a strange but familiar concept, is a lattice internal force caused by chemical modifications and arouses
great interest due to its diversity and efficiency to synthesize new compounds and tune functional materials. Different from
physical pressure loaded by external force that is positive, chemical pressure can be either positive or negative (contract a
lattice or expand it), often through flexible and mild chemical synthesis strategies, which are particularly important as a
degree of freedom to manipulate material behaviors. In this tutorial review, we summarize the features of chemical pressure
as a methodology and demonstrate its role in synthesizing and discovering some typical magnetic, electric, and thermal
responsive functional materials. The measure of chemical pressure using experimental lattice strain and elastic modulus was
proposed, which can be used for quantitative descriptions of the correlation between lattice distortion and property. From
a lattice strain point of view, we classify chemical pressure into different categories: (i) chemical substitution, (ii) chemical
intercalation/de-intercalation, (iii) size effect, and (iv) interface constraint, etc. Chemical pressure, combining chemical
bonding, lattice symmetry, local structure, electron structure and phonon structure effects etc., is a general and effective
method for synthesizing new compounds and tuning functional materials. 1. The nature of chemical pressure and its features in comparison with physical pressure. 2. Experimental ways to measure chemical pressure. 3. Diverse routes to achieve chemical pressure: (i) chemical substitution, (ii) chemical intercalation/de-intercalation, (iii) size effect, (iv) interface
constraint, etc. 4. The role of chemical pressure in modulating magnetic, electric, and thermal responsive functional materials. 5. Current challenges and perspectives of the chemical pressure method for achieving high-performance functional materials. conclusions and outlook This review summarizes the development of chemical
pressure and defines the concept as a methodology for material
design: a lattice internal force caused by chemical modifications. The main feature of chemical pressure is that the lattice strain
is caused by a chemical way, instead of physical one, and hence
is diverse and does not require extreme conditions. As shown in
Fig. 14, applying chemical pressure not only changes the lattice
size itself, but can also change the spin, orbital, and charge
orderings of the relevant atoms. These changes alter material structures at various levels, including lattice symmetry53, 97, local structure8, 9, 82, electronic structure98, 99, and phonon structure38, 46, and hence influences material properties by
virtue of structure-property relationship (Fig. 14). By proposing
two equations for quantification, we can see that the limit of
chemical pressure is generally within several GPa, around two
orders of magnitude smaller than that of the highest achievable
physical pressures. The largest value, -24 GPa to our best
knowledge, was realized via a newly proposed “interphase
strain” method in a PbTiO3/PbO coherent lattice, and is accompanied by an unusual ferroelectric response25. More
novel methods enabling stronger chemical pressures would be
highly attractive to realize striking or unusual properties in the
future. More details, such as local strain gradient and its
propagation from substitution site, and the electronic and
phonon structures induced by the breaking of ideal 3D
translational periodicity, remain for further exploration of new
phenomena in solids by chemical pressure methods. 12 | J. Name. , 2012, 00, 1-3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare. acknowledgements This work was supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (22090042, 21731001 and 21971009),
National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFA0406200), and
EPSRC (UK). We thank Dr. Xin Chen from USTB for his DFT
calculation of the elastic modulus for MOF compound
[{Ru2(F3PhCO2)4}2TCNQ(OEt)2]. 