Researchers and scientists increasingly rely on specialized information retrieval (IR) or recommendation systems (RS) to support them in their daily research tasks. Paper recommender systems are one such tool scientists use to stay on top of the ever-increasing number of academic publications in their Field. Improving research paper recommender systems is an active research Field. However, less research has focused on how the interfaces of research paper recommender systems can be tailored to suit the needs of different research domains. For example, in the Field of biomedicine and chemistry, researchers are not only interested in textual relevance but may also want to discover or compare the contained chemical entity information found in a paper’s full text. Existing recommender systems for academic literature do not support the discovery of this non-textual, but semantically valuable, chemical entity data. We present the First implementation of a specialized chemistry paper recommender system capable of visualizing the contained chemical structures, chemical formulae, and synonyms for chemical compounds within the document’s full text. We review existing tools and related research in this Field before describing the implementation of our ChemVis system. With the help of chemists, we are expanding the functionality of ChemVis, and will perform an evaluation of recommendation performance and usability in future work. ccs concepts • Human-centered computing → Graphical user interfaces; • Information systems → Recommender systems keywords Research paper recommendation, exploratory search, information exploration, chemical entity extraction. 1 conclusion We presented the conceptualization and implementation of a paper recommender system tailored to chemists and biomedical researchers, which accounts for and visualizes chemical entities in their various formats. While searchable molecular entity databases exist, such as PubChem or ChemSpider, no paper recommendation system thus far accounts for and visualizes the chemical entity information contained in academic literature. We identiBied this research gap and used ChemDataExtractor v2, a toolkit for the reliable automated extraction of chemical data from research papers, to create a chemical-entity-aware paper recommendation interface. Our proposed prototype, ChemVis performs formula disambiguation and highlights semantically equivalent chemical entity information among recommended papers no
matter whether a molecule or compound was formatted as a molecular formula, systematic name, generic name, or brand name. We showcased how an interactive visualization of chemical entities could support chemists in more quickly browsing the entity-relevant information in a side-by-side visualization. We hope our work inspires research on other specialized recommendation systems and interfaces tailored to the needs of researchers from a variety of domains. 