conclusions One of the most prominent medical concerns in the world today is related to NDDs for which no definite treatment has yet been suggested. With an aging population and an increase in environmental risk factors due to industry, incidences of NDDs are on the rise. Therefore, research has focused on alternatives to pharmacological medicine that can only relieve patients’ symptoms rather than on finding a method that can prevent the occurrence of NDDs and slow down disease progression. Considering the role of inflammation, oxidative stress, and neurodegeneratio in the pathogenesis of NDDs, the therapeutic a d p eventive r les of s veral antioxidative agents, including nutritional and herbal medicines, have been investigated in cellular and molecular studies. Picein is one of the active compounds of several plants and herbs with a potential for neuroprotection. Salix, an aspirin precursor, has shown significant anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and neuroprotective properties, and picein is one of the phenolic compounds that can be extracted from the water extract of willow bark. In a previous study, our team has shown that treatment of NB SH-SY5Y cells with picein decreased the menadioneinduced ROS levels an recovere mitochondrial activity to normal, indicating the potential of picein as a neuroprotecti agent. However, there are no other studies on the direct neuroprotective effect of picein. A few studies have reported the antioxidative properties of Salix Sp. based on the extracted compounds in cellular models but failed to indicate any favorable effect for the picein compound. Picrorhiza kurroa is another herb from which picein is extracted. However, the one study that evaluated the effect of the extracted picein from this herb failed to show anti-inflammatory and antioxidative properties for this compound. These studies do not provide sufficient evidence for a definite conclusion, either for the anti-inflammat ry and anti xidative properties of picein or its neuroprotective potential. Picein has also shown favorable antifu gal and ibacteria properties in spruce trees. Although these plant studies can be appropriate evidence for further studies, no studies have evaluated the effects of the picein extracted from these plants on other cells; therefore, we cannot draw definite conclusions in this regard. As described in this review, most studies have proven that picein has no cytotoxic properties, which confirms its safety; however, the exact mechanism of the action and efficacy of picein on NDDs.