Wastewater analysis of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) biomarkers can provide essential information on trends in cannabis consumption. Although analysis is mostly focused on the aqueous phase, previous studies have illustrated the need of improving the measurements of raw influent wastewater (IWW) considering also suspended solids. This is important for cannabis biomarkers, because a substantial part of them is expected to be found in the suspended solids due to their more lipophilic character compared with other metabolites/drugs included in these types of studies. However, it remains open to which extent trend estimates might be affected by solely analysing the liquid phase. To investigate this aspect, robust analytical methodologies are required to measure both the liquid and solid phases of IWW. In this work, we firstly tested liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) for THC and its major metabolites (THC–OH, and THC–COOH). Using LLE, no filtration or centrifugation step was required for raw IWW analysis, and the three analytes were extracted from both the liquid and the solid phase simultaneously. In parallel, the raw IWW was centrifuged and the obtained solid and liquid phases were analyzed separately: the liquid phase by both LLE and solid phase extraction (SPE) for comparison of data, and the suspended solids by solid-liquid extraction (SLE). The separate analysis of both phases in a number of samples revealed that a significant amount of cannabis biomarkers (ranging from 42 to 90%) was found in the suspended solids. In addition, the total amount of cannabis biomarkers obtained by analysing raw IWW on the one hand, and by separate analysis of the liquid and the solid phases, on the other hand, was in good agreement. Data from this study show that the sole analysis of the liquid phase would lead to a notable underestimation of cannabis biomarkers concentrations in IWW. 1. conclusions In this research, an analytical method has been developed for measuring cannabis biomarkers (THC, THC–OH, and THC–COOH) in wastewater, with a focus on their occurrence and distribution in the liquid phase and suspended solids. Data from this paper show that LLE of raw IWW (unfiltered or non-centrifuged) allowed obtaining cannabis biomarker concentrations in both the liquid and solid phase. The separate analysis of the liquid and solid phase revealed that a high percentage of the compounds present in influent wastewater corresponded to the solid phase (on average 90% THC, 69% THC–OH, 42% THC–COOH). To date, the most common analytical protocol for cannabis biomarkers analysis in IWW, consisting of the application of SPE, only considers the liquid phase and does not consider their presence in the suspended solids. This, consequently, leads to an underestimation of the total biomarker amount present in IWW. The analysis of the IWW without separation of the solid phase by LLE offers more realistic information on the biomarker concentration in IWW than analysis of only the liquid phase. 