A molecular-level insight into phase transformations is in great demand for many molecular systems. It can be gained through computer simulations in which cooling is applied to a system at a constant rate. However, the impact of the cooling rate on the crystallization process is largely unknown. To this end, here we performed atomic-scale molecular dynamics simulations of organic phase-change materials (paraffins), in which the cooling rate was varied over four orders of magnitude. Our computational results clearly show that a certain threshold (1.2 × 1011 K/min) in the values of cooling rates exists. When cooling is slower than the threshold, the simulations qualitatively reproduce an experimentally observed abrupt change in the temperature dependence of the density, enthalpy, and thermal conductivity of paraffins upon crystallization. Beyond this threshold, when cooling is too fast, the paraffin’s properties in simulations start to deviate considerably from experimental data: the faster the cooling, the larger part of the system is trapped in the supercooled liquid state. Thus, a proper choice of a cooling rate is of tremendous importance in computer simulations of organic phase-change materials, which are of great promise for use in domestic heat storage devices. 1. conclusions regarding the crystalline structure were drawn based on the analysis of a single initial configuration. We repeated our calculations for two more configurations (see Figures S5 and S6) and found very similar results. As a final remark, we note that the threshold value of a cooling rate, which was reported in our study, should be taken with caution as it is related to n-eicosane (C20H42). The consideration of shorter n-alkanes most likely makes it possible to employ faster cooling in computer simulations as compared to n-eicosane because thermal relaxation occurs faster for shorter chains. In turn, slower cooling may be required for longer nalkanes. Furthermore, the results reported in our study can also be relevant for the melting of paraffin samples, i.e., to the process that is opposite to the crystallization. In this case, one can expect the existence of the threshold value of a heating rate. 
Figure 7. The probability distribution P(θ1,θ2) for n‐eicosane crystalline samples cooled down with  the rate of (a) 6 × 109 K/min, (b) 6 × 1010 K/min, (c) 1.2 × 1011 K/min, and (d) 6 × 1011 K/min. Temper‐ ature is set to 250 K. 
3. Methods and Materials  We  performed  molecular  dynamics  simulations  of  bulk  samples  of  n‐eicosane  (C20H42), in which cooling is applied to a system at a constant rate (cooling‐rate simula‐ tions). The all‐atom force field GAFF [42] was chosen to describe paraffin chains. Recently,  we showed that this force field provided a reasonable description of the thermophysical,  structural, and dynamic properties of n‐eicosane [16]. Furthermore, this force field was  found to outperform 9 other atomistic force fields as far as thermal conductivity is con‐ cerned [18]. A paraffin sample consisted of 1000 n‐eicosane chains, so the total number of  atoms in a system amounted to 62,000. According to experimental data, the melting temperature of n‐eicosane is around 310  K [1]. Therefore, to observe the phase transition, most cooling‐rate simulations were car‐ ried out over the interval from 450 to 250 K, although in some simulations, the cooling  was additionally extended to 190 K. As the primary focus of our paper is to explore the  impact of a cooling rate on the crystallization behavior of paraffine samples, all simula‐ tions were repeated with different cooling rates. In practice, the cooling of a sample was  performed in a stepwise manner; the temperature step was always 10 K, but the simula‐ tion time at each temperature was systematically decreased from 100 ns to 100 ps. All in  all, we considered 6 different cooling rates γc: 6 × 109, 6 × 1010, 1.2 × 1011, 6 × 1011, 1.2 × 1012,  and 6 × 1012 K/min, spanning thereby four orders of magnitude. To improve the statistical  reliability of the results, the simulations at each cooling rate were repeated several times  with different  initial configurations of a paraffin sample. Most cooling‐rate simulations  were independently carried out for 21 initial configurations, except for the system with  the  smallest  cooling  rate  of  6  ×  109  K/min. For  this  system,  the  simulations  are 
i . ili i t i i ( 1, 2 - i lli l l it the rate of (a) 6 109 K/min, (b) 6 × 1010 K/min, (c) 1.2 × 1011 K/min, and (d) 6 × 1011 K/min. Temperature is set to 250 K.
. e performed molecular dynamics simulations of bulk samples of n-eicosane (C20H42), in which cooling is applied to a system at a constant rate (cooling-rate simulations). The all-atom force field GAFF [42] was chosen to describe paraffin chains. Recently, we showed that this force field provided a reasonable description of the thermophysical, structural, and dynamic properties of n-eicosane [16]. Furthermore, this force field was found to outperform 9 other atomistic force fields as far as thermal conductivity is concerned [18]. A paraffin sample consisted of 1000 n-eicosane chains, so the total number of atoms in a system amounted to 62,000. According to experimental data, the melting temperature of n-eicosane is around 310 K [1]. Therefore, to observe the phase transition, most cooling-rate simulations were carried out over the interval from 450 to 250 K, although in some simulations, the cooling was additionally extended to 190 K. As the primary focus of our paper is to explore the impact of a cooling rate on the crystallization behavior of paraffine samples, all simulations were repeated with different cooling rates. In practice, the cooling of a sample was performed in a stepwise manner; the temperature step was always 10 K, but the simulation time at each temperature was systematically decreased from 100 ns to 100 ps. All in all, we considered 6 different cooling rates γc: 6 × 109, 6 × 1010, 1.2 × 1011, 6 × 1011, 1.2 × 1012, and 6 × 1012 K/min, spanning thereby four orders of magnitude. To improve the statistical reliability of the results, the simulations at each cooling rate were repeated several times with different initial configurations of a paraffin sample. Most cooling-rate simulations were independently carried out for 21 initial configurations, except for the system with the smallest cooling rate of 6 × 109 K/min. For this system, the simulations are computationally demanding: a single cooling from 450 to 250 K requires a 2.1-µs-long run. Therefore, the simulations with the cooling rate of 6 × 109 K/min were repeated for 12 configurations only. The initial configurations of a paraffin sample were extracted from a
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14576 13 of 16
long trajectory of a system at T = 450 K [16]; special care was taken to ensure the statistical independence of the configurations. The GROMACS package (v. 5) was used for cooling-rate molecular dynamics simulations [32]. The Nose-Hoover thermostat [43,44] and the Parrinello-Rahman barostat [45] were employed to control temperature and pressure in a system, respectively. The electrostatic interactions were handled by the particle mesh Ewald method [46]. The time step was 2 fs. The accumulated simulation time amounted to 30 µs. To calculate the thermal conductivity, we used the LAMMPS simulation package [31,47]. As our cooling-rate simulations were carried out with the GROMACS suite, we first converted the paraffin samples from the GROMACS to LAMMPS representation using the approach developed in our earlier study [18]. After that, the thermal conductivity coefficient κ was evaluated from the heat flux autocorrelation function using the Green-Kubo relation [48]. This equilibrium molecular dynamics method was shown to be preferable over non-equilibrium counterparts for n-eicosane [18]. 4. conclusions Here we report the first computational study that systematically explores how the cooling rate affects the accurate description of the crystallization of organic phase-change materials (paraffins) in atomic-scale molecular dynamics simulations. To achieve this, we systematically varied the cooling rate in computer simulations of n-eicosane from 6 × 109 to 6 × 1012 K/min (we note that the cooling rate of 6 × 109 K/min is close to the smallest rate accessible by most computational groups). We found the existence of the threshold value of 1.2 × 1011 K/min for cooling rates in simulations. When cooling is slower than the threshold, the simulations qualitatively reproduce an experimentally observed abrupt change in the temperature dependence of the density, enthalpy, and thermal conductivity of paraffins upon crystallization. Beyond this threshold, the paraffin’s properties observed in simulations deviate considerably from experimental data as the system is partly trapped in the supercooled liquid state. This can be witnessed through a systematic drop in the fraction of crystalline domains in a paraffin sample at low temperatures when the cooling rate increases. Furthermore, for fast cooling, we do not observe an abrupt change in the temperature dependence of the mass density, crystallization enthalpy, and thermal conductivity anymore. The crystallization temperature decreases systematically with the cooling rate in line with the experimental data available. 