Since 2010, DNA nanotechnology has advanced rapidly, helping overcome limitations in the use of DNA solely as genetic material. DNA nanotechnology has thus helped develop a new method for the construction of biosensors. Among bioprobe materials for biosensors, nucleic acids have shown several advantages. First, it has a complementary sequence for hybridizing the target gene. Second, DNA has various functionalities, such as DNAzymes, DNA junctions or aptamers, because of its unique folded structures with specific sequences. Third, functional groups, such as thiols, amines, or other fluorophores, can easily be introduced into DNA at the 5′ or 3′ end. Finally, DNA can easily be tailored by making junctions or origami structures; these unique structures extend the DNA arm and create a multi-functional bioprobe. Meanwhile, nanomaterials have also been used to advance plasmonic biosensor technologies. Nanomaterials provide various biosensing platforms with high sensitivity and selectivity. Several plasmonic biosensor types have been fabricated, such as surface plasmons, and Raman-based or metal-enhanced biosensors. Introducing DNA nanotechnology to plasmonic biosensors has brought in sight new horizons in the fields of biosensors and nanobiotechnology. This review discusses the recent progress of DNA nanotechnology-based plasmonic biosensors. 1. conclusions This review covered the most recent progress in nucleic acid-based plasmonic biosensor fabrication (Table 1). From cancer marker sensing to toxin detection, the combination of plasmon resonance-generating structures with oligonucleotides, such as aptamers, or more complex constructions, such as origami folded aptamers and DNAzymes, has certainly proven to be efficient. Not only do nucleic acid-mediated sensors have better affinity and stability, they are also easier to produce. Furthermore, surface plasmon resonance-based sensing presents numerous advantages, such as lower detection limits due to their increased sensitivity and a shorter sensing time. Only then can the potential of plasmonic biosensors for application in real sample analysis be achieved. Nonetheless, based on recent studies, DNA nanotechnology for plasmonic biosensors offers a more sensitive and less costly alternative to other traditional sensing methods. AgNPs aggregates Hepatitis B virus DNA 50 fM [84] 1 Surface Plasmon Resonance. 2 Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance. 3 Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. 4 Metal-Enhanced Fluorecence.