Membrane-based processes are increasingly used to clarify and concentrate thermosensitive fruit juices and plant extracts as alternatives to conventional processes. This work aimed to evaluate the quality of red fruit juices clarified and concentrated by an integrated membrane process with special regard to the preservation of valuable compounds. A red fruit juice obtained from a blend of pomegranate, cactus pear, and red orange juices of Sicilian origin was clarified by microfiltration (MF) and then pre-concentrated up to 33 ◦Brix by nanofiltration (NF). The pre-concentrated juice was finally concentrated by osmotic distillation (OD) up to 50 and 60 ◦Brix. Samples of clarified, pre-concentrated, and concentrated juice were analyzed for their physico-chemical composition and in terms of the antioxidant activity and inhibitory activity against α-amylase and lipase. The results clearly confirmed the assumption of a mild fruit juice processing method, allowing us to preserve the original nutritional and functional properties of the fresh juice. In particular, the OD retentate at 60 ◦Brix resulted the most active sample against pancreatic lipase and α-amylase inhibitory activity with IC50 values of 44.36 and 214.65 μg/mL, respectively. 1. conclusions A concentrated juice with high nutritional and organoleptic profile was produced from a blend of red fruit juices through an integrated membrane system based on a sequential combination of microfiltration, nanofiltration, and osmotic distillation. The experimental results clearly confirm that the content of bioactive compounds as well as the antioxidant activity of the original juice is very well-preserved in the concentrated juice independently of the degree of concentration achieved. In addition, the OD retentate at 60 ◦Brix resulted in the most active sample against pancreatic lipase and α-amylase inhibitory activity with IC50 values of 44.36 ± 0.85 and 214.65 ± 2.03 µg/mL, respectively. The preservation of quality parameters in the concentrated juice clearly supported an excellent resistance of the OD membrane to wetting phenomena. The appearance of concentrated juice was similar to that of fruit syrups, sugary products normally stored and marketed at room temperature. It can be added to water and pasteurized MF retentate (MF membranes retain microorganisms that must be inactivated) to obtain a juice with sensory, organoleptic, and nutritional properties similar to those of fresh juice. Alternatively, the concentrated product can be used as a flavoring and/or coloring for food products: it satisfies the functional characteristics of natural dyes such as high dyeing efficiency, good stability, and attractive color. The development of formulations for nutraceutical applications (anti-cholesterol, antiviral, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antihypertensive products) is also of great interest.