"The first major barrier in neuro-tourism is the technology associated with its modalities such as ET, EEG, GSR, or FAC. The development of these hardware sensors is improving in terms of size, portability, system usability, and sensory strength. However, researchers still require guidance and training when dealing with the device for the first time, particularly for EEG devices. Research needs studies to examine different modalities evenly. We discovered most researchers employed ET, while other neuro-tourism techniques, including EGG and head and body movement, need additional research. The price of these technologies may be the cause, but the value of the outcomes obtained will outweigh its cost in the long run. We also anticipate greater study on all various neuro-tourism uses. For instance, tourists’ emotions in pricing and restaurant experience were investigated the least, yet these applications are not less important than others. Additionally, selecting the most powerful stimuli in neuro-tourism studies is important. We discovered that the majority of researchers (87.18%) utilized various visual-based elicitation stimuli for all applications, while other researchers (12.82%) used predefined task stimuli mostly to investigate the tourist experience. However, there are no specific guidelines that determine the most effective stimuli except that the more novel the stimulus is, the more it influences memory [17] by engaging with more of a tourist’s senses."

"The complex nature of human emotions makes it challenging to research several facets of tourists’ emotional responses at one time. Therefore, we recommend employing a triangulation (hybrid) method—a combination of more than one neuro-tourism modality with self-reports—to investigate errors especially if the research wants to evaluate multiple numbers of emotional tourists."

"Based on the findings of this review, we found limitations in using AI methods with neuro-tourism modalities. We anticipate future ML applications for detecting tourist emotions. Such applications will have benefits for both tourists and tourism agencies."