"Here, we presented an exploratory study in a non-treated setting of severe psoriatic patients where unknown immunological factors potentially related to cardiovascular risk could be overexpressed. Considering this, three essential elements in atherosclerotic plaque development were first assessed: macrophage recruitment and their inflammatory and phagocytic differentiation, activation of adaptive pathways such as mTORC that help with myofibroblast trans-differentiation, and the hemodynamic and endothelial changes associated with the inflammatory process itself. We analyzed the first two elements, looking for aspects in a monocyte phenotype that would suggest specific recruitment to the plaque and then activation of the mTORC pathway. This pathway was activated in the psoriatic group even when CVD and obesity were similar between groups, suggesting an inflammatory–immune-mediated activation. We demonstrated the presence of M2 monocytes with a different pattern of inflammatory activation than M1 monocytes and less activity of the CXCL10-CXCR3 chemotaxis pathway. Chemotaxis pathways have recently been described as an alternative way to diminish the trafficking of inflammatory cells to ingrowing plaques [13]. This reinforces the idea of better understanding the movement of these cells between different compartments as an important aspect of accelerated atheromatosis. Besides higher mTORC1 activation, our monocytes exhibited another interesting feature: the dissociation of IL-1β and IL-6 in M2 monocytes; IL-6 remains at elevated basal values in psoriatic patients and is mathematically demonstrated to behave differently from other cytokines in M2 monocytes (Supplementary Figure S1). Given that IL-6 depends on the activation of NFκB and not an inflammasome such as IL-1β, the idea of an NFκB-dependent activation of adaptation pathways such as mTORC or ADAMTS7 overproduction could be proposed. In previous studies, IL-6 induces endothelial dysfunction upregulating adhesion molecules in vitro [14]. On the other hand, in line with our findings, mTOR modulation drives inflammatory changes in endothelial cells [15]. Despite this, it is an exploratory study with a limited number of patients and without specific pathway analysis in other research models, so a causal relationship cannot be established."