"However, how to regulate LFA-1 activation to the intermediate-affinity state in IS and the leading edge of T cells as well as the biological significance of LFA-1 in this affinity state have not been well studied."

"The aberrant activation of LFA-1 on T cells contributes to the development of infectious diseases, cancer, and autoimmune diseases. Thus, LFA-1 has been a target to modulate T-cell functions to fight infection or induce self-tolerance for autoimmunity. However, in contrast to the success of inhibitors against integrins αIIbβ3, α4β1, and α4β7, none of the LFA-1 targeted drugs, either antibodies, peptides, or small molecules are clinically successful. The major reason is the broad effects of LFA-1 signaling in regulating immunological responses. The intermediate-affinity LFA-1 maintains the minimum cell-cell interactions and may have differing signaling than the high-affinity LFA-1, therefore, further identifying the differential regulation of LFA-1 activation in T cells may help develop a novel approach to regulate T-cell functions."

"Targeting LFA-1-related adaptor proteins may also provide a novel approach to tune the effects of LFA-1 activation differentially. As an example, RASA3, a Ras/Rap GTPase-activating protein, negatively regulates LFA-1-mediated T-cell adhesion and activation. Blocking RASA3 might modulate LFA-1 function and T-cell activity in autoimmune diseases."

"As a new ITAM-bearing adaptor, the role of DAP12 in T-cell activation and functions has not been studied."

"Immunotherapy provides substantial benefits for some cancer patients, yet the treatment efficacy in most tumor types remains limited. One key reason is the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment, which reduces recruitment of cytotoxic T cells. Integrins including LFA-1 regulate T-cell recruitment. Recent studies show that a small-molecule activator of LFA-1, 7HP349, enhances tumor killing activity by increasing recruitment of tumor-specific T cells into the tumor microenvironment. However, LFA-1 mediates intra-tumor activated T cells to form clusters in mouse models; this reduces egress of T cells from the tumor and suppress immune responses in the draining lymph nodes. Thus, adjusting strategies according to the pathogenesis of differing tumors may improve the efficacy of cancer therapy."

"Although extensively studied, much