The Merton investment-consumption problem is fundamental, both in the field of finance, and in stochastic control. An important extension of the problem adds transaction costs, which is highly relevant from a financial perspective but also challenging from a control perspective because the solution now involves singular control. A further significant extension takes us from additive utility to stochastic differential utility (SDU), which allows time preferences and risk preferences to be disentangled. In this paper, we study this extended version of the Merton problem with proportional transaction costs and Epstein-Zin SDU. We fully characterise all parameter combinations for which the problem is well posed (which may depend on the level of transaction costs) and provide a full verification argument that relies on no additional technical assumptions and uses primal methods only. The case with SDU requires new mathematical techniques as duality methods break down. Even in the special case of (additive) power utility, our arguments are significantly simpler, more elegant and more far-reaching than the ones in the extant literature. This means that we can easily analyse aspects of the problem which previously have been very challenging, including comparative statics, boundary cases which heretofore have required separate treatment and the situation beyond the small transaction cost regime. A key and novel idea is to parametrise consumption and the value function in terms of the shadow fraction of wealth, which may be of much wider applicability. Mathematics Subject Classification (2010): 93E20 , 60H20, 49L20, 91B16, 91G10 1 conclusion from Proposition 8.3 is that in the typical case p∗ and p ∗ are decreasing in R. This result is proven to hold over the regime where the problem is well-posed whenever R < 1 and also when R > 1 unless either m(0) ≤ 0 or R ∈ (1, 2) and λ < σ2 . The condition m(0) > 0 is equivalent to δ + r(S − 1) < 0, which is automatically satisfied if R,S > 1 and δ, r > 0. Such monotonicity behaviour of p∗ and p
∗ in R is perhaps not too surprising in view of the fact that the Merton ratio qM = λ/(Rσ) is decreasing in R. Nonetheless, it is useful to stress that the consumption motive will also affect p∗ and p ∗ as R varies. Note that the optimal consumption rate in the frictionless case can be rewritten as
mM = m(qM ) = r + δ − r
S +
λ2
2R
S − 1
S . (8.3)
Then for a fixed S < 1, the (frictionless) consumption rate is increasing in R. Following similar intuition to that used in Section 8.1, in the case with frictions we expect that the elevated consumption due to an increase in R will make the agent more inclined to hold cash (i.e. a smaller fraction of wealth is invested in the risky asset). This effect is in the same direction as the impact of R on the Merton ratio (when S < 1). However, if S > 1 then (8.3) suggests the optimal frictionless consumption rate is decreasing in R. The (lack of) consumption motive will then encourage the agent to hold less cash and hence the fraction of wealth invested in the risky asset becomes larger. The effect of R on the investment level through the consumption motive is therefore opposite in sign to the direct effect of R on the Merton ratio, and the net effect on the investment level becomes ambiguous. This is the reason why in the case S > 1 we require further conditions in Proposition 8.3 to be able to conclude that p∗ and p
∗ are decreasing in R. Indeed, there exist counterexamples such that the boundaries are not decreasing in R, although usually they require somewhat extreme model parameters such as a negative discount rate in conjunction with very high transaction costs. See Figure 8. 8.3 what determines whether consumption increases or decreases with the introduction of transaction costs? In this section we give three related arguments which together justify the comments made in Remarks 3.5 and 7.6(c). Consider the continuous-time investment-consumption problem for EZ-SDU in the frictionless case. Suppose the agent uses constant proportional strategies so that the value function is as given in (3.6) where H is as given in (3.5), i.e. H(q,m) = δ + (S − 1)
(
r −m+ λσq − 1
2 q2σ2R
)
. Then, provided H(q,m) > 0, and with z = x+ yθ denoting initial wealth, V0 = z1−R
1−R
(
m1−S
H(q,m)
)θ . Maximis-
ing V0 is equivalent to maximising ((1 −R)V0) 1
1−R = z m H(q,m) 1 1−S . Note that this quantity is expressed in
economically meaningful units as it represents the certainty equivalent value. As in Section 3.1, suppose that the fraction of wealth invested in the risky asset is constrained to be equal to q, where q is fixed and given, and possibly suboptimal, and consider choosing the optimal consumption rate. The maximum certainty equivalent can be found by differentiation and we get that the optimal consumption rate m is given by m = m(q) and solves 1m = Hm(q,m) (1−S)H(q,m) . Since Hm(q,m) = (1−S) this simplifies to m(q) = H(q,m(q)), so that m(q) is the root of the decreasing (in m) function hq where hq(m) = H(q,m)−m. Suppose S < 1. Then H(q,m) has a minimum in q at qM (independent of the value of m). In particular, for q 6= qM , 0 = hq(m(q)) = H(q,m(q)) −m(q) > H(qM ,m(q)) −m(q) = hqM (m(q)) (where the strict inequality follows from the strict convexity of H in q). Then, since hqM is decreasing we must
have m(qM ) < m(q). In particular, m(·) has a minimum at qM . Conversely, suppose S > 1 so that H(q,m) has a maximum in q at qM . Then, 0 = hq(m(q)) = H(q,m(q))−m(q) ≥ H(qM ,m(q))−m(q) = hqM (m(q)) and since hqM is decreasing we must have m(qM ) ≥ m(q). In particular, m(·) has a maximum at qM (and the uniqueness of the minimiser follows from the uniqueness of the maximiser of H in q as before). It follows that (in the zero-transaction cost case) when S < 1 the impact of using a non-optimal investment strategy, and then optimising over consumption is to increase the immediate consumption rate relative to the optimal consumption rate under an optimal investment strategy. When S > 1, the impact of using a non-optimal investment strategy, and then optimising over consumption is to decrease the immediate consumption rate. One impact of transaction costs is to force the agent to use a suboptimal investment strategy when compared with the frictionless world. The above analysis then explains whether the impact of transaction costs on the consumption rate is to increase or decrease instantaneous consumption (relative to the frictionless case) and why this depends exactly on the shape of H(q,m(q)) (does it have a minimum or a maximum at qM) which in turn is directly related to the sign of (S − 1). The above argument might be considered a mathematical justification of the role of (S − 1) in determining the impact of the introduction of transaction costs on consumption, but it does not directly relate to the economic explanation of the fundamental role of S−1 given in Remark 3.5 in terms of the interplay between two impacts of reducing the certainty equivalent value of future consumption. To understand what is happening at a more fundamental level, we consider recursive utility over one time period. Consider an agent in a one-period economy (with times 0 and 1) containing a risk-less asset and a risky asset. The agent has initial wealth x and recursive preferences. The time-0 controls available to the agent are to decide the amount c ∈ (0, 1) to consume at t = 0, and the number of units φ of the risky asset to hold between times 0 and 1. We assume that the price of the risk-less asset is normalised so that it is constant over time, that the initial price of the risky asset is 1 and that the return on the risky asset is given by the time-1 measurable random variable Z (so that 1 invested in the risky asset at time 0 yields (1+Z) at time-1). It follows that the wealth of the agent at time 1 (we assume no frictions) is x− c+φZ. We assume that all wealth at time 1 is consumed at time 1. Under quasi-arithmetic recursive preferences, the aim of the agent is to maximise the certainty equivalent value
f−1 ( f(c) + f ◦ g−1 (E[g(x− c+ φZ)]) )
(8.4)
where f and g are increasing, concave functions. The example to consider is f(z) = z 1−S 1−S and g(z) = z1−R 1−R in which case the recursive utility is precisely the discrete-time (one-period) analogue of the EZ-SDU we are considering in the main body of the paper. We specialise to the case of g(z) = z 1−R 1−R , but leave f general. Then, with w = φ x−c we find
g−1 (E[g(x− c+ φZ)]) = (x− c)D(w) where D(w) = g−1(E[g(1 + wZ)]) = ( E [ (1 + wZ)1−R ]) 1 1−R . Then maximising (8.4) simplifies to first maximising D with respect to w, and then with ŵ = argmaxD(w), maximising
f−1 (f(c) + f ((x− c)D(ŵ)))
We can also consider the problem of maximising the certainty equivalent value for a given investment strategy. Suppose w (and therefore D = D(w)) is fixed. Then, since f is increasing, it is sufficient to maximise f(c) + f(D(x − c)). Assuming differentiability of f (and an interior maximum, for which a sufficient condition is f ′(0) = ∞) the maximiser ĉ = ĉ(x,D) solves
f ′(c) = Df ′(D(x− c)) = 1
(x− c) [yf ′(y)]
∣ ∣
y=D(x−c) . (8.5)
We want to consider the impact of changing D, and it is clear that this depends on whether yf ′(y) is increasing or decreasing in y. By the concavity of f , the left expression of (8.5) is decreasing in c and the middle expression is increasing in c. Therefore, if yf ′(y) is increasing in y then ĉ(x,D) is decreasing
in D; conversely, if yf ′(y) is decreasing in y then ĉ(x,D) is increasing in D. For f(z) = z 1−S
1−S , zf ′(z) is
decreasing precisely when S > 1, so that ĉ(x,D) is increasing in D if and only if S > 19. Finally we combine this argument with the impact of using a sub-optimal investment strategy as in the continuous-time case: if w∗ is optimal then D(w) < D(w∗) and optimal consumption in markets with frictions is lower than in the frictionless case if and only if S > 1. The third argument is related to Remark 3.5 and connects the above analysis to the impact of 1/S as a measure of the inter-temporal substitutability of consumption – high S indicates a strong preference for smooth consumption over time. Consider the first equality in (8.5). D enters into the expression Df ′(D(x − c)) twice. First, the factor D means that decreasing D lowers the expression, resulting in higher optimal consumption. This role for D is related to the impact of changes of future wealth on consumption and is independent of the preferences expressed via f . Second D is an argument of the factor f ′(D(x− c)) – here lowering D increases the marginal time-1 utility and therefore, in isolation, decreases time-0 consumption. This factor depends on the preferences via f ′ and is strongest when S is large. Thus, when S is small, the first effect dominates and using suboptimal investment strategies leads to increased consumption. When S is large, the desire for smooth consumption increases, the second effect dominates, and time-0 consumption falls. 9 concluding remarks In this paper we studied the optimal investment-consumption problem over the infinite horizon in a Black–Scholes–Merton financial market. Relative to the standard frictionless case first investigated by Merton [22, 23], the innovations are that we consider proportional transaction costs and non-additive preferences, as captured by Epstein–Zin stochastic differential utility. Our results determine when the problem is well-posed, and in this case, we give a complete description of the optimal investment and consumption strategies. A major innovation is our focus on the shadow fraction of wealth in the risky asset: it turns out that with this as the primary variable, the problem reduces to the study of a freeboundary problem for one-dimensional, singular ODE. Even for additive (CRRA) preferences (studied first by Magill and Constantinides [19] and Davis and Norman [6]) our approach brings substantial simplifications and insights, and we are able give new (financial) interpretations to many of the quantities which arise. The non-additive case brings extra technical challenges (especially as regards existence and uniqueness of the utility process associated with a given consumption stream, and the comparison theorem used to facilitate the verification lemma); we overcome these challenges by making use of previous results in the frictionless case, see [12]. Study of the non-additive case is increasingly important as there is mounting evidence that the additive case fails to accurately describe investor behaviour. This paper is the first to give a full solution of the problem in the non-additive case (previous results only covered the small transaction cost case and only for an incomplete set of parameter combinations) and therefore is the first to make it possible to properly study the comparative statics of the problem and to distinguish the separate roles played by the risk aversion (which primarily affects the width and location of the no-transaction wedge), and the elasticity of intertemporal complementarity (which primarily affects the consumption rate). The methods of this paper rely crucially on scaling properties of the problem (including the dynamics of the price process, the proportional transaction costs and the form of the recursive utility) to reduce the dimensionality, and it looks difficult to extend them beyond this case. Notwithstanding, looking at the extant literature in the additive case, it seems that there are at least two natural extensions which would become tractable for SDU using the methods of this paper. 9Alternatively for f(z) = z 1−S
1−S of power law form, ĉ solves c−S = D1−S(x − c)1−S . It follows that ĉ = D1− 1 S x which is
increasing in D if and only if S > 1.