We study a three-layer data market comprising users (data owners), platforms, and a data buyer. Each user benefits from platform services in exchange for data, incurring privacy loss when their data, albeit noisily, is shared with the buyer. The user chooses platforms to share data with, while platforms decide on data noise levels and pricing before selling to the buyer. The buyer selects platforms to purchase data from. We model these interactions via a multistage game, focusing on the subgame Nash equilibrium. We find that when the buyer places a high value on user data (and platforms can command high prices), all platforms offer services to the user who joins and shares data with every platform. Conversely, when the buyer’s valuation of user data is low, only large platforms with low service costs can afford to serve users. In this scenario, users exclusively join and share data with these low-cost platforms. Interestingly, increased competition benefits the buyer, not the user: as the number of platforms increases, the user utility does not necessarily improve while the buyer utility improves. However, increasing the competition improves the overall utilitarian welfare. Building on our analysis, we then study regulations to improve the user utility. We discover that banning data sharing maximizes user utility only when all platforms are low-cost. In mixed markets of highand low-cost platforms, users prefer a minimum noise mandate over a sharing ban. Imposing this mandate on high-cost platforms and banning data sharing for low-cost ones further enhances user utility. 1 conclusion In this paper, we study the intricate interplay between user privacy concerns and the dual incentives of online platforms: to safeguard user privacy and to monetize user data through sales to third-party buyers. To this end, we have constructed a multi-stage game model that captures the interactions between users, platforms, and data buyers. Our model delineates various scenarios where the interplay of platform service costs, the valuation of data, and privacy concerns dictate equilibrium outcomes. Additionally, we examine potential regulations designed to bolster user privacy and enhance market outcomes for users.