Problem definition: Appointment scheduling problems under uncertainty encounter a fundamental trade-off between cost minimization and customer waiting times. Most existing studies address this trade-off using a weighted sum approach, which puts little emphasis on individual waiting times and, thus, customer satisfaction. In contrast, we study how to minimize total cost while providing waiting time guarantees to all customers. Methodology/results: Given box uncertainty sets for service times and no-shows, we introduce the Robust Appointment Scheduling Problem with Waiting Time Guarantees. We show that the problem is NP-hard in general and introduce a mixed-integer linear program that can be solved in reasonable computation time. For special cases, we prove that polynomial-time variants of the well-known Smallest-Variance-First sequencing rule and the Bailey-Welch scheduling rule are optimal. Furthermore, a case study with data from the radiology department of a large university hospital demonstrates that the approach not only guarantees acceptable waiting times but, compared to existing robust approaches, may simultaneously reduce costs incurred by idle time and overtime. Managerial implications: This work suggests that limiting instead of minimizing customer waiting times is a win-win solution in the trade-off between customer satisfaction and cost minimization. Additionally, it provides an easy-to-implement and customizable appointment scheduling framework with waiting time guarantees. 1. conclusion This work was motivated by the lack of intraday appointment scheduling and sequencing approaches to precisely control waiting times. We introduce maximum waiting time guarantees to respect
Bauerhenne, Kolisch, and Schulz: Robust Appointment Scheduling with Waiting Time Guarantees 28
customers’ waiting time tolerance even in a worst-case scenario of uncertain service times and no-shows. Hence, the established guarantees prevent negative effects of waiting times on customer dissatisfaction, perceived service quality, and loyalty shown in previous empirical research. At the same time, we minimize worst-case costs incurred by idle time and overtime. We show that the presented appointment scheduling problem with waiting time guarantees is NP-hard and find optimal scheduling and sequencing rules in polynomial time for practically relevant special cases. Assuming constant idle time costs and zero no-shows, we show optimality of a sequencing rule that schedules customers in ascending order with the amount of uncertainty about their service times and their waiting tolerance. This rule provides a deeper understanding of the optimality of the well-known SVF rule and extends it to consider waiting time guarantees. Moreover, for the case of non-increasing idle time costs, we show optimality of the ASAP scheduling rule that sets each appointment time as early as possible while fulfilling the waiting time guarantees. The presented sequencing and scheduling rules are intuitive and easy to implement. Our case study with real data from the radiology department of a large hospital shows that robust appointment scheduling with waiting time guarantees not only prevents excessive waiting times. Compared to weighted sum approaches, our approach also provides more flexibility to control the timing of idle and waiting times. Most importantly, we introduce the waiting time guarantees with a minimal increase in worst-case costs, which in many cases is even negative. Thus, compared to weighted sum approaches, waiting time guarantees can even reduce costs without increasing the waiting time of the longest waiting customer. 