There is increasing interest in using LLMs as decision-making “agents.” Doing so includes many degrees of freedom: which model should be used; how should it be prompted; should it be asked to introspect, conduct chain-of-thought reasoning, etc? Settling these questions—and more broadly, determining whether an LLM agent is reliable enough to be trusted—requires a methodology for assessing such an agent’s economic rationality. In this paper, we provide one. We begin by surveying the economic literature on rational decision making, taxonomizing a large set of fine-grained “elements” that an agent should exhibit, along with dependencies between them. We then propose a benchmark distribution that quantitatively scores an LLMs performance on these elements and, combined with a user-provided rubric, produces a “rationality report card”. Finally, we describe the results of a large-scale empirical experiment with 14 different LLMs, characterizing the both current state of the art and the impact of different model sizes on models’ ability to exhibit rational behavior. 1 conclusions Our work presents a novel benchmark for assessing LLM’s ability to exhibit economically rational behavior, which requires a complex mix of logic, probability, optimization, reasoning about other humans, economic principles, and contextual judgment. Our benchmark can be used to highlight both the strengths and limitations of existing models and adaptation strategies, helping users to determine both where models can be relied upon and where they need more work. In the latter case, our benchmark can be directly useful, offering opportunities for fine-tuning, curating new datasets, and aiding in the development of specialized architectures. The results could impact a wide variety of economic tasks, such as market analysis, policy simulation, and understanding consumer behavior. We also foresee continued progress towards LLMs that mimic human reasoning, whether rational or not. Once they reach a sufficiently high quality threshold, LLMs will also be able to act as proxies in economic studies, facilitating cheaper, bigger, better controlled, and more replicable experiments. 