Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) has emerged as a popular machine learning paradigm, enabling model training across the data and the task parties with different features about the same user set while preserving data privacy. In production environment, VFL usually involves one task party and one data party. Fair and economically efficient feature trading is crucial to the commercialization of VFL, where the task party is considered as the data consumer who buys the data party’s features. However, current VFL feature trading practices often price the data party’s data as a whole and assume transactions occur prior to the performing VFL. Neglecting the performance gains resulting from traded features may lead to underpayment and overpayment issues. In this study, we propose a bargaining-based feature trading approach in VFL to encourage economically efficient transactions. Our model incorporates performance gain-based pricing, taking into account the revenue-based optimization objectives of both parties. We analyze the proposed bargaining model under perfect and imperfect performance information settings, proving the existence of an equilibrium that optimizes the parties’ objectives. Moreover, we develop performance gain estimation-based bargaining strategies for imperfect performance information scenarios and discuss potential security issues and solutions. Experiments on three real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed bargaining model. 1 conclusions and futurework In this paper, we have identified the need for an economically efficient approach to feature trading in VFL and proposed a bargainingbased model to address this issue. Our model incorporates performance gain-based pricing and analyzes the bargaining process under perfect and imperfect performance information settings. We have demonstrated the existence of an equilibrium that optimizes the objectives of both the task party and the data party in perfect performance information setting. Additionally, we extend the result to imperfect performance information scenarios and propose performance gain estimation-based bargaining strategies. We also discuss potential security issues and solutions. Experiments on real-world datasets have verified the effectiveness of the proposed bargaining model. However, the proposed bargaining model has several limitations. 1) It does not provide protection if the participants manipulate the
goods or information when terminate the game. For example, the task party may accept a feature bundle with high performance gain but only report a lower value to reduce its payment. A possible solution for this is to involve of a trustworthy third party for evaluation. 2) The sampling-evaluation based quoted pricing choosing strategy is straightforward but not efficient and the task party can employ automatic bargaining offer strategy, such as learning based, to optimize the efficient of offer generating. Nevertheless, we maintain a positive view of the impact of this paper and hope it serves as a foundational work on FL markets and inspires future research.