The demand for voluntary insurance against low-probability, high-impact risks is lower than expected. To assess the magnitude of the demand, we conduct a meta-analysis of contingent valuation studies using a dataset of experimentally elicited and survey-based estimates. We find that the average stated willingness to pay (WTP) for insurance is 87% of expected losses. We perform a meta-regression analysis to examine the heterogeneity in aggregate WTP across these studies. The meta-regression reveals that information about loss probability and probability levels positively influence relative willingness to pay, whereas respondents’ average income and age have a negative effect. Moreover, we identify cultural sub-factors, such as power distance and uncertainty avoidance, that provided additional explanations for differences in WTP across international samples. Methodological factors related to the sampling and data collection process significantly influence the stated WTP. Our results, robust to model specification and publication bias, are relevant to current debates on stated preferences for low-probability risks management. 1. First, we
perform BMA analysis with a weight equal to the inverse of the number of data points per study and then without
weighting. The results given in Table 6 corroborate previous findings, where the magnitude and the sign of the
moderators exhibit little variation. To further investigate heterogeneity, we apply a three-level structure to the meta-regression model which allows
for examining differences in outcomes within studies (i.e., within-study heterogeneity) as well as differences between studies (i.e., between-study heterogeneity).43 Unlike other models, we do not need to know correlations
between outcomes reported within primary studies since the second level accounts for sampling covariation (Van
den Noortgate et al., 2013). Note that the random effects hierarchical method that we use for estimation allows
coefficients to vary randomly across studies (Ugur et al. 2016; Neves and Sequeira, 2018). We test different
candidate variables as third level such as article Id, country, survey-based, risk type, and coverage type. The results
do not change from previous findings, confirming the absence of correlation between SWTP within studies and therefore the appropriateness of the two-level model used to analyze heterogeneity.44 None of the third-level
candidate variables can explain more of the variability between studies. As a fourth robustness check, we conduct outlier analyses by first examining extreme SWTP with confidence
intervals that did not overlap with the confidence interval of the pooled effect. We perform influence analyses via
a “leave-one-out” method, in which effect size is recalculated when a single study is left out of the analysis
(Viechtbauer and Cheung, 2010). We identified three observations as potential outliers or influential outcomes
with the leave-one-out analysis and the Baujat plot displayed in Figure 7. After progressively excluding these three data points, we further reduce heterogeneity while confirming the obtained estimation results.45 Finally, as a last
robustness check we estimate a meta-regression model using conditional SWTP (excluding zeros WTP) as effect size. The estimation results are quite similar to those reported in Table 4.46
This table reports additional meta-regression results from BMA without weighting and with a weight equal to the inverse of the number of data points per study. The dependent variable of regression is the standardized willingness to pay (SWTP). Explanatory variables are defined in Table 3. For the precision (publication bias) variable, the posterior standard error in the unweighted(weighted) model is not available. As such, we recommend interpreting PIP values with caution. Notes: Variables with PIP above 0.5 are shown in bold. SD = standard deviation. SE = standard error. PIP= posterior inclusion probability. N.A. = not available. Number of observations: 65. 6. conclusion We present a meta-analysis of contingent valuation studies for low-probability risk insurance. Consistent with the few observed market-based data, the meta-analytic average willingness to pay found is lower than expected losses. Survey-based studies exhibited a particularly low weighted mean of 64%. Normalized WTP levels vary considerably across studies allowing meta-regression capturing different sources of heterogeneity. The main finding is that the variability of stated WTP is structurally dependent on risk characteristics, fundamental and methodological factors. Some of these factors have a strong theoretical basis to explain low insurance demand at the individual level. Our results provide evidence of exogenous determinants that may affect the relative WTP variability at the study level. Moderators such as information about probabilities and very small probability levels appear to positively influence relative WTP, whereas some respondents’ sociodemographic characteristics such as income and age show a negative effect. Laboratory-based estimates, appear also to report significantly higher values for relative WTP than alternative data collection methods. These factors are likely to accentuate cognitive biases and judgment errors, particularly in the presence of several WTP elicitation tasks. Similarly, cultural factors related to power distance and uncertainty avoidance bring further explanations for discrepancies in insurance WTP across international samples. Our results also document a consistent downward trend of average WTPs over time, a finding that may be indicative of an increasing inattention to low-probability risks driven in part by the increasing acceptance of climate change perspectives and physical risk damages, especially in the absence of comprehensive information on the probability of losses. Unweighted BMA
Weighted BMA (number of data points per study)
To ensure the long-term viability of non-mandatory coverage, outreach efforts are required through insurance education and promotion actions to guarantee a sufficient pool of policyholders, taking mandatory insurance systems with very low premiums and no adverse selection as a boundary model. Furthermore, policymakers should continue to support individual vulnerability reduction measures, which seem to be effective in reducing the severity of losses and less subject to individuals’ biases and heuristics. However, achieving these two essential objectives may prove more difficult for certain social groups with low financial capacity, for whom insurance may seem the primary safety net. One way to ease the budget constraint is to combine insurance mechanism with other flexible financial instruments such as credit access. For example, access to emergency loans may reduce the initial cash payment of premiums and lessen the liquidity constraint. Such a solution, consistent with the principle of discontinuity of preferences, would reflect the preference for more flexible risk management vehicles. For non-price factors affecting demand, we still need more empirical evidence on the interactions between risk preferences and behavior biases, on the one hand, and insurance characteristics on the other. 