We evaluate the effects of bundling demand for broadband internet by K-12 schools. In 2014, New Jersey switched from decentralized procurements to a new procurement system that bundled schools into four regional groups. Using an event study approach, we find that, on average, prices for participants decreased by onethird, and broadband speed purchased increased sixfold. We bound the change in school expenditures due to the program and find that participants saved at least as much as their total “E-rate” subsidy from the federal government. Under weak assumptions on demand, we show that participating schools experienced large welfare gains. JEL: D44, H42, L86, L96. 1 institutional details Our setting involves the procurement of high-speed broadband internet by public and private school districts and libraries (henceforth, schools) in the U.S. state of New Jersey.1 New Jersey’s Digital Readiness for Learning and Assessment Project (DRLAP) was launched in 2013 by the state’s Department of Education to help K-12 schools better incorporate technology into their classrooms. The broadband component of the program, known as DRLAP-Broadband, was designed to help schools work together to improve their internet access and network infrastructure to bridge the technology gap across schools and ensure internet access necessary to utilize new digital resources. Typically, and exclusively before 2014 in New Jersey, schools organized the procurement of internet and other telecommunications services individually. In 2014, New Jersey began centralizing the procurement process with the goals of reducing costs and increasing access to high-speed internet. The design of the process was meant to meet the need for federal internet subsidies. Below, we describe how subsidies work and the particular intervention in New Jersey. 1.1 the e-rate program In the United State, K-12 schools can apply for subsidies for their internet expenses through a federally funded program called E-rate, which is administered by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and funded by the Universal Service Fund under the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The subsidy ranges from 20% to 90% of a school’s telecommunications expenditures, depending on the poverty level and rural status. The E-rate program was designed to help eligible schools obtain internet by subsidizing internet access. In particular, the FCC set a goal of 1 megabit per second (Mbps) per student to support digital learning in every classroom. In 2023, 74% of school districts met this goal, compared to 8% in 2015. The typical procurement and subsidy process is highly decentralizde. A school determines the amount of internet it needs (e.g., unlimited internet with 1,000 Mbps download speed) and submits a request for competitive bids to the Universal Service Administrative Company (USAC) by filing FCC Form 470. USAC posts these requests on its website, and interested ISPs submit bids. After reviewing the bids, the school selects the most cost-effective ISP and files FCC Form 471 with details of the chosen ISP, following which either the school or the chosen ISP can apply to USAC for reimbursement. All eligible schools that conduct a fair and open competitive bidding process get the subsidies.2 The total subsidy cap in 2023 was $4.5 billion. 1“Broadband” is a generic term for capacity transmission, like fiber optic or coaxial wires. 2See https://e-ratecentral.com/Resources/Educational-Information/The-E-Rate-Process. 1.2 demand aggregation intervention in new jersey In 2014, the State of New Jersey Department of Education planned a coordinated procurement process for broadband internet services called the Internet Cooperative Purchasing Initiative (ICPI, or “consortium”). Schools who choose to participate in the consortium were asked to submit letters of intent and service order forms for networking and internet access services as part of a consolidated Request For Proposals (RFP) by spring 2014. By June, 392 schools volunteered to be listed in the RFP, which included 20 public charter schools and 25 private or non-public schools, the rest of which were multi-building school districts. Although the RFP included many services, we focus on dedicated broadband internet services. This service includes the transport (wire and circuits) of internet through Regional Hubs (two per region) and the provision of transport and internet to each school or district. After collecting demand information through the the RFP, New Jersey conducted a reverse scoring auction for the bundled school broadband services. The price bids were weighted by qualitative factors such as the ability of the ISP to provide service coverage that complied with the technical specifications, the deployment plan, company experience, and service support. Among the ISPs that competed in each region, some were household residential providers and others were large commercial backbone providers. Schools also completed a voluntary survey about their level and price of service as of May 2014, i.e., prior to the conclusion In 2014, New Jersey implemented a program for schools to pool demand for broadband internet. In this paper, we present three main findings: the consortium led to lower prices and higher chosen internet speeds; total expenditure savings due to the consortium was between 67% and 237% of the current E-rate subsidy for participating schools; and there was a substantial increase in school welfare due to the consortium. Our findings are important for understanding the effective design of subsidy policies
and the importance procurement design can have in achieving public policy goals. In our setting, the consortium could completely replace the E-rate program in terms of costeffectiveness. However, it has the additional advantage that it is not taxpayer-funded.