We study a matching problem between agents and public goods, in settings without monetary transfers. Since goods are public, they have no capacity constraints. There is no exogenously defined budget of goods to be provided. Rather, each provided good must justify its cost, leading to strong complementarities in the “preferences” of goods. Furthermore, goods that are in high demand given other already-provided goods must also be provided. The question of the existence of a stable solution (a menu of public goods to be provided) exhibits a rich combinatorial structure. We uncover sufficient conditions and necessary conditions for guaranteeing the existence of a stable solution, and derive both positive and negative results for strategyproof stable matching. conclusion that the voting rule (and hence the menu selection mechanism) is manipulable, however, the notion of manipulability that is guaranteed by the Duggan–Schwartz Theorem differs from ours, and crucially, counts as manipulations some things that we do not consider as such in the menu selection setting. For example, if one’s true preferences are 2 ≻ 1, and {1, 2} is offered, in their setting misreporting so that only {2} is offered is considered a profitable manipulation, while in our setting we do not consider it as such. that tighter upper bounds obtained in follow-up work might be harder (or impossible) to translate into tractable algorithms. An open question that we already have in a similar vain is on the precise asymptotic running time for our tighter upper bound from Theorem 1.5. The algorithm that follows from our proof of that theorem is quadratic in the number of public goods, while the algorithm that follows from the proof of the looser upper bound from Proposition 1.2 is linear. In Appendix E we prove an upper bound slightly weaker than that from Theorem 1.5 but nonetheless stronger than that from Proposition 1.2, which still yields a linear-time algorithm. Is there a linear-time algorithm for finding a stable menu for all g, t, u such that u−1 t−1 ≥ g−2?