We study a contract design problem between a principal and multiple agents. Each agent participates in an independent task with binary outcomes (success or failure), in which it may exert costly effort towards improving its probability of success, and the principal has a fixed budget which it can use to provide outcome-dependent rewards to the agents. Crucially, each agent’s reward may depend not only on whether she succeeds or fails, but also on whether other agents succeed or fail, and we assume the principal cares only about maximizing the agents’ probabilities of success, not how much of the budget it expends. We first show that a contract is optimal for some objective if and only if it gives no reward to unsuccessful agents and always splits the entire budget among the successful agents. An immediate consequence of this result is that piece-rate contracts and bonuspool contracts, two types of contracts which are well-studied and motivated in the literature on multi-agent contract design, are never optimal in this setting. We then show that for any objective, there is an optimal priority-based weighted contract, which assigns positive weights and priority levels to the agents, and splits the budget among the highest-priority successful agents, with each such agent receiving a fraction of the budget proportional to her weight. This result provides a significant reduction in the dimensionality of the principal’s optimal contract design problem and gives an interpretable and easily implementable optimal contract. Finally, we discuss an application of our results to the design of optimal contracts with two agents and quadratic costs. In this context, we find that the optimal contract assigns a higher weight to the agent whose success it values more, irrespective of the heterogeneity in the agents’ cost parameters. This suggests that the structure of the optimal contract depends primarily on the bias in the principal’s objective and is, to some extent, robust to the heterogeneity in the agents’ cost functions. NYU Abu Dhabi; sumitgoel58@gmail.com; 0000-0003-3266-9035 Technion Israel Institute of Technology; whanncar@gmail.com; 0000-0002-4273-6249 Supported at the Technion by a Zuckerman fellowship. 1 conclusion We study a contract design problem between a principal and multiple agents. In a setting where the principal is budget-constrained and does not care about how much of the budget is exhausted in incentivizing the agents, we show that the maximal set of effort levels that can be sustained in equilibrium is characterized by equilibria of contracts in which the entire budget is split among agents that succeed. Hence, piece-rate and bonus-pool contracts are never optimal in this setting. We further identify a natural subclass of priority-based weighted contracts that are sufficient to implement the Pareto frontier of equilibria that can be induced in equilibrium. The result provides a significant reduction in dimensionality of the optimal contract design problem. We illustrate this by applying our results to derive the optimal contract for a special parametric case with two agents. Our result for this case suggests that the structure of optimal contract is, to some extent, robust to the heterogeneity in the agents’ cost functions. 