We propose an indirect inference strategy for estimating heterogeneous-agent business cycle models with micro data. At its heart is a first-order vector autoregression that is grounded in linear filtering theory as the cross-section grows large. The result is a fast, simple and robust algorithm for computing an approximate likelihood that can be easily paired with standard classical or Bayesian methods. Importantly, our method is compatible with the popular sequence-space solution method, unlike existing state-of-the-art approaches. We test-drive our method by estimating a canonical HANK model with shocks in both the aggregate and cross-section. Not only do simulation results demonstrate the appeal of our method, they also emphasize the important information contained in the entire micro-level distribution over and above simple moments. 1 conclusion We develop an indirect inference method for estimating HA business-cycle models using micro data. The key idea is to approximate the data-generating process with a low-dimensional dynamic factor model and use the implied likelihood for inference. Employing the Dynamic Mode Decomposition algorithm, the likelihood evaluation is fast and simple. Moreover, our estimation procedure can seamlessly accommodate the sequence-space solution method, while most currently available estimation methods (e.g. Liu and Plagborg-Møller 2023) are designed for state-space solution only. Our method is based on two assumptions: 1) the HA model is well-approximated by a lowdimensional dynamic factor model, and 2) the cross-sectional dimension of the micro data is large. We show that the first assumption holds in a wide range of HA models and provide a theoretical justification for it. In our simulation study, we show that our method works well on a realistic dataset, verifying the empirical relevance of the second assumption. Comparing with other conventional methods including time-series estimation with crosssectional moments and frequency-domain estimation, our method delivers a better estimate both in terms of bias and standard error because of the more efficient use of cross-sectional information. As our method is based on approximated likelihood, we show that it can be easily pair with Bayesian methods to conduct Bayesian indirect inference. 