We introduce a multivariate local-linear estimator for multivariate regression discontinuity designs in which treatment is assigned by crossing a boundary in the space of running variables. The dominant approach uses the Euclidean distance from a boundary point as the scalar running variable; hence, multivariate designs are handled as uni-variate designs. However, the distance running variable is incompatible with the assumption for asymptotic validity. We handle multivariate designs as multivariate. In this study, we develop a novel asymptotic normality for multivariate local-polynomial estimators. Our estimator is asymptotically valid and can capture heterogeneous treatment effects over the boundary. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our estimator through numerical simulations. Our empirical illustration of a Colombian scholarship study reveals a richer heterogeneity (including its absence) of the treatment effect that is hidden in the original estimates. 1 conclusion We provide an alternative estimator for RD designs with multivariate running variables. Specifically, our estimator does not convert a multivariate RD estimation problem into a
scalar RD estimation problem. We estimate the multivariate conditional mean functions as is. For the purpose of RD estimations, we develop a new asymptotic result for the multivariate local-polynomial regression with dimension specific bandwidths. In numerical simulations, we demonstrate the favorable performance of our estimator against a frequently used procedure of a distance measure as the scalar running variable. We apply our estimator to the study of Londoño-Vélez et al. (2020b) who study the impact of a scholarship program that has two eligibility requirements. In this application, our estimates are consistent with the original estimates and reveal a richer heterogeneity in the program impacts over the policy boundary than the original estimates. Our contributions can be summarized as follows. First, we demonstrate the issues in the current practices of multivariate RD designs and offer a remedy for them. The distance approach (Black, 1999, Keele and Titiunik, 2015, for example) of converting a multivariate running variable with the Euclidean distance from a point violates the inference assumption of Calonico et al. (2014b); the aggregation approach (Matsudaira, 2008, for example) of aggregating students with eligibility for all but one requirement has limited applicability and capability to capture heterogeneous effects. We provide a strategy for estimating heterogeneous effects without dimension reduction. Second, our asymptotic results complete the theory of multivariate local-polynomial estimates. After Masry (1996) has shown the asymptotic normality of multivariate localpolynomial estimates with common bandwidths between dimensions, no studies have achieved the asymptotic theory with dimension-specific bandwidths. As demonstrated in our simulation results, allowing different bandwidths for each dimension matters substantially for the bias correction procedure, which results in the improved coverage rate of our preferred estimates. However, some theoretical and practical issues remain. First, our consideration is limited to a random sample; hence, spatial RD designs are excluded from our consideration. We defer our focus to spatial design because of its theoretical and conceptual complexity. Nevertheless, we aim to propose a spatial RD estimation based on newly developed asymptotic results of Kurisu and Matsuda (2023) in a separated study. Second, our theoretical results can be applied to any finite-dimensional RD design; however, the practical performance of estimators with more than two dimensions is limited. Although most RD designs have at most two dimensions, the practical implementation of a higher-dimensional RD estimation is an open question. Similarly, we provide the higher-order bias expressions for our multivariate local-polynomial estimates; however, estimating the derived bias expressions is challenging. Therefore, a new approach to exploiting these expressions is desirable. Third, our approach requires a sufficiently large sample over the boundary, and its performance with an extremely small sample size is limited. For a smaller sample, an explicit randomization approach is a compelling alternative. Cattaneo et al. (2015), Cattaneo et al. (2016b) and Cattaneo et al. (2017) propose the concepts and a randomization inference. Their approach requires a substantially stronger assumption but is applicable to a geographical RD design (Keele et al., 2015) as well. Nonetheless, these two approaches are complementary. On the one hand, if one assumes a stronger homogeneous treatment effect assumption around the units at a certain distance from the boundary, then the randomization approach can also be used for a small sample. However, we can relax this strong assumption by using our estimator with a sufficiently large sample. Fourth, covariates are often incorporated in the estimation procedures in RD designs. For the efficiency gain, Frölich and Huber (2019) propose a method with a multi-dimensional non-parametric estimation; Calonico et al. (2019) develop an easy-to-implement augmentation; and recently Noack et al. (2021) considers flexible and
efficient estimation including machine-learning devices and several studies such as Kreiß and Rothe (2021) and Arai et al. (2021) explore augmentation with high-dimensional covariates. We defer these analyses to theoretical and conceptual complications for a companion study for a geographic RD design. Fifth, we provided the optimal bandwidths for multivariate RD estimation; however, the optimal kernel for this class of estimators is unknown. Finally, we do not provide any procedure to aggregate heterogeneous estimates over the set of boundary points. Averaging over boundary points is a preferred feature. For example, a major feature of the rdmulti package, Cattaneo et al. (2020), is averaging over multiple boundary points. In considering the pooling parameter, Cattaneo et al. (2016a) offers the target parameter. Furthermore, Cattaneo et al. (2021) uses a different policy in Columbia with multiple cutoffs to extrapolate the missing part of the support. These ideas can be a good benchmark to consider averaging and extrapolation when the support has holes in the boundary. 