Based on interactions between individuals and others and references to social norms, this study reveals the impact of heterogeneity in time preference on wealth distribution and inequality. We present a novel approach that connects the interactions between microeconomic agents that generate heterogeneity to the dynamic equations for capital and consumption in macroeconomic models. Using this approach, we estimate the impact of changes in the discount rate due to microeconomic interactions on capital, consumption and utility and the degree of inequality. The results show that intercomparisons with others regarding consumption significantly affect capital, i.e. wealth inequality. Furthermore, the impact on utility is never small and social norms can reduce this impact. Our supporting evidence shows that the quantitative results of inequality calculations correspond to survey data from cohort and cross-cultural studies. This study’s micro–macro connection approach can be deployed to connect microeconomic interactions, such as exchange, interest and debt, redistribution, mutual aid and time preference, to dynamic macroeconomic models. conclusion This study presented a new model that connects the interaction effects of
intercomparisons between individuals and others and references to social norms on time preferences to a dynamic macroeconomic model. Through this, we estimated the impact
of changes in time preference (discount rate) on capital, consumption and utility and the inequality (coefficient of variation, Gini index) resulting from these changes. The new
findings are that (i) interactions with others significantly impact capital (wealth) inequality more than consumption. (ii) Among interactions with others,
intercomparisons of consumption have a more significant impact on capital inequality and (iii) social norms effectively reduce the impact of consumption on inequality. These
findings reaffirm the importance of social norms against waste. Our supporting evidence indicates that the quantitative impact of the time preference interaction on wealth
inequality corresponds to survey data from cohort and cross-cultural studies and that it has no small impact on utility inequality. Previous studies have shown that multiple psychological motivations and factors, as well as mutual recognition and shared expectations of social groups, are essential for
time preference; however, no specific mathematical model exists for these factors and time preference. Therefore, we formulated the interactions on time preferences as
relative capital, consumption and social norm comparisons.