This paper examines the impact of US monetary policy tightening on emerging markets, distinguishing between direct and indirect spillover effects using the global vector autoregression with stochastic volatility covering 32 countries. The paper shows that an increase in the US interest rate significantly reduces output for emerging markets, leading to larger, more prolonged, and persistent declines. Such an impact is further intensified by global trade integration, causing a sharper yet slightly quicker rebounding output drop. The spillover effects are significantly amplified when US monetary policy tightening is accompanied by an increase in monetary policy uncertainty. Finally, emerging markets exhibit considerable heterogeneity in their responses to US monetary policy shocks. 1 conclusions and policy implications We documented how US monetary policy affects emerging markets in a multi-country model with endogenous stochastic volatility, with a separation between direct and indirect effects. First, our results show that the Fed’s monetary policy tightening reduces the US’s output growth and inflation and leads to an increase in US macro uncertainty, especially inflation uncertainty. Once policy tightening is accompanied by an increase in uncertainty on future interest rates path, it leads to deeper recessions. Importantly, we find that a rise in the US interest rate has a negative spillover effect on economic growth in emerging markets. When factoring in policy uncertainty, this tightening effect intensifies, becoming more prominent and longer-lasting. The full impact, considering both direct and indirect effects due to global integration, causes a sharper drop in growth, though it may rebound more quickly. Within one internally-consistent global model, we provide empirical support for the literature on global inflation drivers (e.g., Auer et al., 2019), global output co-movement (e.g., Kose et al., 2003), and global financial cycle (e.g., Rey, 2015, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020a,b). Nevertheless, our results highlight substantial heterogeneity in how emerging markets get impacted by comparing the response across China, emerging markets in Asia excluding China, and emerging markets in Latin America. For instance, China’s reaction, especially in inflation, is more pronounced than other emerging markets, and the renminbi’s value is particularly susceptible to uncertainty. The demand channel is essential for Latin America, which experiences a fivefold greater drop in output than Asia under total effect during uncertain times. The impact of spillovers and uncertainty on emerging markets are therefore influenced by their exposure to the
US, their own trade network, and integration into financial markets, among other factors. Our results, while estimated with the pre-COVID sample, offer important policy implications for the ongoing rate hikes by the Fed in fighting the inflation surge, which originates from several potential factors, including substantial COVID-related demand support amidst global supply constraints as well as the energy shock from the Russian war in Ukraine, just to name a few. First, it emphasizes the importance of considering the negative spillover to the global economy, which would eventually spillback onto the US economy, in calibrating US monetary policy tightening. Ignoring the spillover and the spillback channel could lead to an over-tightening that reduces growth more than desirable both domestically in the US and globally. This also necessitates the coordination of policy action across countries. Second, given that the most critical scenario occurs when the US’s monetary policy tightening is accompanied by an increase in policy uncertainty, it emphasizes the need for explicit and precise guidance about the future path of monetary policy. Our study, therefore, finds support for clear communication about the Fed’s policy function as well as a commitment to achieve its mandated objectives. Third, while the prominent exchange rate depreciation helps dampen the negative spillover impact on output by making emerging market exports cheaper, it could increase the risks of unsustainable debt in emerging countries, particularly for those with a large share of debt in foreign currency. For this latter group, the room to reduce interest rates to stabilize the macroeconomy is limited because doing so could make the exchange rate depreciate even more, and sovereign risks get elevated. At the same time, the accommodative fiscal policy may be outside the scope due to limited fiscal space. For this group, therefore, multilateral support and initiatives to reduce debt distress and foster a quicker return to the path of economic growth are vitally important. Last but not least, given the important role of US policy in the (global) financial cycle, the possibility of a higher-for-longer rate scenario if inflation becomes harder to tame in the last mile could increase risk to the (global) financial system. Several policy discussions have suggested that other policies could play a certain role in supporting monetary policy in fighting inflation. A prominent candidate is fiscal policy, in which a tighter fiscal stance would allow central banks, including the Fed, to increase interest rates by less than they otherwise would, which would help contain borrowing costs for governments as well as financial stability risks. 