We expand on earlier research on the topic by discussing an infinitely-repeated-game model with a subgame perfect equilibrium strategy profile (SPE) as a solution concept that diminishes incentives to violate speed limits in a carrot-and-stick fashion. In attempts to construct an SPE strategy profile, the initial state is chosen such that the drivers are playing a mixed strategy whereas the police is not enforcing with certainty. We also postulate a “short-period” version of the repeated game with generalized stage-game payoffs. For this game, we construct a multi-stage strategy profile that is a Nash equilibrium but not an SPE. Some solution candidates are excluded by showing that they do not satisfy a one-shot-deviation property that is a necessary condition for an SPE profile in a repeated game of perfect information. conclusions Even though subgame perfect strategy profiles always exist in infinitely repeated games, constructing an SPE profile that regulates the drivers’ incentive to speed in the most desirable way is not a trivial task. We saw that it is impossible to have a stable solution with a strategy profile having only one state on its punishment path given that the probability of speeding is at least 50 percent while the police is controlling. A strategy profile of an infinitely repeated game with an initial state where the police is also mixing - i.e. not enforcing some of the time and enforcing rest of the time - was not discussed in this paper (except the repetition of the stage game mixed strategy NE), which leaves room for further analysis and possibly discovery of game theoretically stable solution that is also societally feasible. An outcome in a “short period repeated game” where the drivers are speeding with a probability bD(S) bounded by the ratio β(bD(S))/α(bD(S)), the functions β and α generalizing the stage game payoffs, was shown to be supportable as a Nash equilibrium but not an SPE. This has the implication that when a player enters a certain subgame (or subgames), perhaps willingly - yet irrationally - or by a mistake, the player no longer has an incentive to follow the strategy profile, which means the player’s behaviour drifts farther from the social planner’s control. Certain externalities, such as deterrence, would be likely to help to maintain a stable outcome in a real-life setting. It is clear that if the drivers are to be punished in some way or sense for violating the traffic laws, the punishment policy and its extent can’t be just arbitrarly guessed and implemented. Rather, it should stem from a carefully premeditated analysis that follows rationally solid argumentation which, of course, should further be evaluated and refined in the light of empirical evidence. In this article we have demonstrated how game theoretic modeling and the solution concept of SPE is one way to find basis for such logical arguments. Our infinitely repeated game model was restricted to the case of a driver having perfect information. Even though it is very unrealistic that a driver would calculate his or her expected utility whenever entering a vehicle in a very complex fashion as we have done in this article, the repeated game framework is able to show that even if the driver did this with perfect information, she or he could not do any better in an SPE than by following the equilibrium strategy profile. Any deviation from the driver makes the situation worse for the driver, which is a very appealing feature of the Nash equilibrium concept. 