We consider a producer’s problem of selling a product to a continuum of privacyconscious consumers, where the producer can implement third-degree price discrimination, offering different prices to different market segments. In the absence of privacy constraints, Bergemann, Brooks, and Morris [2015] characterize the set of all possible consumer-producer utilities, showing that it is a triangle. We consider a privacy mechanism that provides a degree of protection by probabilistically masking each market segment, and we establish that the resultant set of all consumer-producer utilities forms a convex polygon, characterized explicitly as a linear mapping of a certain high-dimensional convex polytope into R. This characterization enables us to investigate the impact of the privacy mechanism on both producer and consumer utilities. In particular, we establish that the privacy constraint always hurts the producer by reducing both the maximum and minimum utility achievable. From the consumer’s perspective, although the privacy mechanism ensures an increase in the minimum utility compared to the non-private scenario, interestingly, it may reduce the maximum utility. Finally, we demonstrate that increasing the privacy level does not necessarily intensify these effects. For instance, the maximum utility for the producer or the minimum utility for the consumer may exhibit nonmonotonic behavior in response to an increase of the privacy level. 1 conclusion This paper explores the intersection of price discrimination and consumer privacy. Building upon the framework of Bergemann et al. [2015], we first introduce a privacy mechanism that adds a layer of uncertainty regarding consumer values, thereby directly impacting both consumer and producer utilities in a market setting. We use a novel analysis based on a merging technique to characterize the set of all pairs of consumer and producer utilities and establish that, unlike the existing results, it is not necessarily a triangle. Instead, it can be viewed as the linear mapping of a high-dimensional polytope into R2. We used our characterization to derive several insights. In particular, we prove that imposing a privacy constraint does not necessarily help the consumers and, in fact, can reduce their utility. We view our paper as a first attempt to understand how user privacy impacts the limits of price discrimination. There are several exciting directions to explore in this vein. For instance, an interesting future direction is to extend our results to a setting with a multiproduct seller (similar to that of Haghpanah and Siegel [2022]).