Transmission system operators have a growing need for more accurate forecasting of electricity demand. Current electricity systems largely require demand forecasting so that the electricity market establishes electricity prices as well as the programming of production units. The companies that are part of the electrical system use exclusive software to obtain predictions, based on the use of time series and prediction tools, whether statistical or artificial intelligence. However, the most common form of prediction is based on hybrid models that use both technologies. In any case, it is software with a complicated structure, with a large number of associated variables and that requires a high computational load to make predictions. The predictions they can offer are not much better than those that simple models can offer. In this paper we present a MATLAB® toolbox created for the prediction of electrical demand. The toolbox implements multiple seasonal Holt–Winters exponential smoothing models and neural network models. The models used include the use of discrete interval mobile seasonalities (DIMS) to improve forecasting on special days. Additionally, the results of its application in various electrical systems in Europe are shown, where the results obtained can be seen. The use of this library opens a new avenue of research for the use of models with discrete and complex seasonalities in other fields of application. It has been compared the results obtained to those reported by [57]. FIGURE 8 ABOUT HERE 6. conclusions and future research This article presents a new toolbox based on MATLAB® whose objective is the prediction of electrical demand using exponential smoothing methods with multiple seasonal Holt-Winters models. Neural networks are also available for benchmark purposes. Firstly, the general formulation for the nHWT models has been presented, both with additive and multiplicative trend, including damping. The model is presented valid so that the different seasonalities are included in the model in an additive or multiplicative way, independently of the rest. In the same way, the use of DIMS within the model allows situations with special events to be modeled internally, without the need for external modifications with exogenous variables. Secondly, the library itself has been described. On the one hand, the architecture of the library and its organization in classes are shown. The methods and properties associated with the different classes are described in depth, as well as their relationship with the parameters of the models. The article hovers over the most important, although sufficient to be able to carry out accurate predictions. To demonstrate the functionality of the toolbox, tested and published application cases are included, in which the excellent results offered by the toolbox demonstrate the interest of its use. On the one hand, the application of the DIMS for forecasting demand in the Easter period has been shown, and then applied to all holidays (including long weekends). This toolbox has been mainly used for short-term electricity demand prediction. Its formulation allows its use for longer periods, although it has not been optimized for this. The data used has been provided by the TSOs through their websites.