Climate change has become an unavoidable problem in achieving sustainable development. As one of the major industries worldwide, tourism can make a significant contribution to mitigating climate change. The main objective of the paper is to assess the development level of low-carbon tourism from multi-aspect, using the Yellow River Basin as an example. Firstly, this study quantified tourism carbon dioxide emissions and tourism economy, and analyzed their evolution characteristics. The interaction and coordination degree between tourism carbon dioxide emissions and tourism economy were then analyzed using the improved coupling coordination degree model. Finally, this study analyzed the change in total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism by calculating the Malmquist-Luenberger productivity index. The results showed that: (1) The tourism industry in the Yellow River Basin has the characteristics of the initial environmental Kuznets curve. (2) There was a strong interaction between tourism carbon dioxide emissions and tourism economy, which was manifested as mutual promotion. (3) The total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism was increasing. Based on the above results, it could be concluded that the development level of low-carbon tourism in the Yellow River Basin has been continuously improved from 2000 to 2019, but it is still in the early development stage with the continuous growth of carbon dioxide emissions. 1 conclusions. Xiong et al. discovered that there is a feeble decoupling linkage between the
22
regional TCDE and the economic progress, which is primarily driven by tourism in China [57]. As the pursuit of high-quality development of TE continues, the growth rate of TE is likely to remain higher than the growth rate of TCDE, leading to an even wider gap in their respective growth rates [58]. When the second half of the inverted U-shaped relation of EKC appears, the decrease of TCDE and CD may lead to the decrease of CCD. The results also highlighted regional differences within the growth of low-carbon tourism in the
YRB. The development extent of low-carbon tourism is thought to be directly correlated with regional differences in development [21]. There are significant differences in regional development among the nine provincial-level administrative regions in YRB. Taking 2019 as an example, Shandong's GDP is about 24 times that of Qinghai. It follows that there are clear regional variations in the growth of low-carbon tourism in YRB, which is not a finding of great importance. Amore critical question is how regional development affects low-carbon tourism development. Tong et al. found that China's tourism economy has a significant carbon emission reduction effect, and although the direct effect of the tourism economy on carbon emission intensity is significantly positive, the indirect effect is significantly negative and stronger than the direct effect [59]. The findings of this paper suggest both the coordinated development of low-carbon TE and the total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism are related to regional differences. In addition, it is certain that regional differences in technical progress of low-carbon tourism lead to regional differences in total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism, and further cause regional differences in the development level of low-carbon tourism. The study found that the total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism continued to increase,
indicating that low-carbon tourism in YRB continued to be in a good development state from 2000 to 2019. The research results of Zhao et al. showed that the dependency of economic growth on
23
fundamental energy usage is progressively diminished in YRB [60]. This study further proves that this conclusion is still valid in the tourism industry of YRB. Long-term carbon emissions are greatly reduced by renewable energy use whereas they increase substantially by using energy that is not renewable [61]. Therefore, reducing the energy consumption intensity of TE or increasing the proportion of renewable energy are two effective ways to improve the quality of low-carbon tourism development. COVID-19 has certainly disrupted the tourism industry. It is difficult to effectively measure the
carbon emissions of the tourism industry after the outbreak of COVID-19 due to the serious lack of data and the failure of some measurement coefficients. However, judging from the data on energy consumption in tourism-related industries, it is likely that technological advances in low-carbon tourism were not significantly affected by the outbreak. A more electricity-dependent tourism industry would produce fewer direct carbon emissions. For China, using more clean energy rather than coal to generate electricity is the key to achieving the carbon peaking and carbon neutrality goals. As a study of low-carbon tourism assessment, this paper has the following novelties. (1) The
assessment of low-carbon tourism development takes into account both the quantitative relationship between TCDE and TE, as well as their total factor productivity, which has been rarely seen in previous studies. (2) An improved CCD model is constructed, which can reflect the interaction between TCDE and TE. Previous studies related to low-carbon tourism tend to focus on decoupling analysis rather than coupling coordination analysis. However, in the early stages of development characterized by a rapid increase in carbon dioxide emissions, coupling coordination analysis may find more information. (3) The total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism is calculated to assess the quality of low-carbon tourism development. Total factor productivity is a mature assessment method of industrial development quality, but few studies have applied it to low-carbon tourism assessment. The total factor
24
productivity of low-carbon tourism is not only related to TE and TCDE, but also related to the investment of tourism resources. With more and more attention paid to low-carbon tourism research, total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism may become one of the main methods to assess the development quality of low-carbon tourism. 5 conclusions Based on EKC, CCD model and MLPI, this study comprehensively assessed the development
level of low-carbon tourism in YRB. Firstly, the carbon dioxide emissions related to tourism were estimated, and the TCDE index and TE index were calculated referring on the TCDE and TE indicators. Based on the results of the above indexes, it was judged whether the development process of low-carbon tourism in YRB had experienced EKC. Secondly, the coupling and coordination analysis of TCDE and TE was carried out to assess the interaction between the two systems. Finally, the total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism was assessed using MLPI, and the decomposition indices MLTE and MLTC were used to explore the impact of technical efficiency and technical progress. The main findings and contributions of the paper were as followed: (1) The development of
low-carbon tourism in YRB shows the characteristics of the initial EKC. TCDE and TE are growing, but the growth rate of TE is greater than the growth rate of TCDE. (2) There are substantial disparities in the CD of various regions in YRB, but the overall level is at a high level. The growth of TCDE and TE shows that they promote each other based on strong interaction. (3) Total factor productivity of low-carbon tourism has grown at an average yearly rate of 7% in YRB, primarily as a result of technical progress. The technical efficiency of all regions in YRB only fluctuates slightly, while technical progress has increased significantly in most regions. In addition, despite the impact of
25
COVID-19 on the tourism economy in the Yellow River Basin, the pursuit of low-carbon tourism development remains ongoing. Overall, the quality of low-carbon tourism development in the YRB has been continuously improved, but to reduce TCDE, a long way still needs to be gone. Although this study has achieved good results, there are still some limitations that cannot be
avoided in future more detailed studies. First, due to the limitation of sample size and workload, the discovery of regional development differences in low-carbon tourism comes from the observation and summary of the basic characteristics of data results, and does not use more accurate methods such as spatial econometric analysis. Second, it is difficult to compare the development level of low-carbon tourism in different years or regions due to the lack of a comprehensive indicator. 