Fraudulent or illegal activities are ubiquitous across many applications and involve users bypassing the rule of law, often with the strategic aim of obtaining some benefit that would otherwise be unattainable within the bounds of lawful conduct. However, user fraud is detrimental, as it may compromise safety or impose disproportionate negative externalities on particular population groups. To mitigate the potential harms of users engaging in fraudulent activities, we study the problem of policing such fraud as a security game between an administrator and users. In this game, an administrator deploys R security resources (e.g., police officers) across L locations and levies fines against users engaging in fraudulent or illegal activities at those locations. For this security game, we study both welfare and revenue maximization administrator objectives. In both settings, we show that the problem of computing the optimal administrator strategy is NP-hard and develop natural greedy algorithm variants for the respective settings that achieve at least half the welfare or revenue as the welfare-maximizing or revenue-maximizing solutions, respectively. We also establish a resource augmentation guarantee that our proposed greedy algorithms with just one additional resource, i.e., R + 1 resources, achieve at least the same welfare (revenue) as the welfare-maximizing (revenue-maximizing) outcome with R resources that is NP-hard to compute. Finally, since the welfare and revenue-maximizing solutions can differ significantly, we present a framework inspired by contract theory, wherein a revenue-maximizing administrator is compensated through contracts for the level of welfare it contributes to the system. Beyond extending our theoretical results in the welfare and revenue maximization settings to studying equilibrium strategies in the contract game, we also present numerical experiments highlighting the effectiveness of using contracts in bridging the gap between the revenue and welfare-maximizing administrator outcomes. 1 conclusion and future work In this work, we studied the problem of policing and monitoring fraudulent activities at potentially susceptible nodes or locations in a system as a security game between an administrator and fraudulent users. Motivated by several real-world settings where fraudulent and illegal activities by certain groups of users are prevalent (see Section 1.1), we introduced a model of a security game wherein the administrator can deploy a budget of security resources across locations and levy fines against users found engaging in illegal activities. We studied our security game under both welfare and revenue maximization administrator objectives. In both settings, we showed that, in general, the problem of computing the optimal resource allocation strategy of the administrator is NP-hard, and we developed greedy-like algorithms for both administrator objectives with associated approximation ratio and resource augmentation guarantees. Finally, given that the revenue and welfare-maximizing outcomes of the administrator can differ significantly from each other, we presented a framework inspired by contract theory that helps ensure that a revenue-maximizing administrator incorporates welfare maximization as part of its objective when allocating security resources. Beyond extending our theoretical results in the welfare and revenue maximization settings to the contract framework, we also
presented numerical experiments based on a real-world application case of intermediate public transport services in Mumbai, India. Our numerical results validated our theoretical insights and highlighted the effectiveness of using contracts in bridging the gap between the revenue and welfare-maximizing outcomes of the administrator.