Business research is facing the challenge of scattered knowledge, particularly in the realm of brand loyalty (BL). Although literature reviews on BL exist, they predominantly concentrate on the present state, neglecting future trends. Therefore, a comprehensive review is imperative to ascertain emerging trends in BL This study employs a bibliometric approach, analyzing 1,468 papers from the Scopus database. Various tools including R software, VOS viewer software, and Publish or Perish are utilized. The aim is to portray the knowledge map, explore the publication years, identify the top authors and their co-occurrence, reliable documents, institutions, subjects, research hotspots, and pioneering countries and universities in the study of BL. The qualitative section of this research identifies gaps and emerging trends in BL through Word Cloud charts, word growth analysis, and a review of highly cited articles from the past four years. Results showed that highly cited articles mention topics such as brand love, consumer-brand identification, and social networks and the U.S. had the most productions in this field. Besides, most citations were related to Keller with 1,173 citations. Furthermore, in the qualitative section, social networks and brand experiences were found to be of interest to researchers in the field. Finally, by introducing the antecedents and consequences of BL, the gaps and emerging trends in BL were identified, so as to present the direction of future research in this area. the ebb and flow of brand loyalty: in the realm of brand loyalty (BL). Although literature reviews on BL exist, they predominantly concentrate on the present state, neglecting future trends. Therefore, a comprehensive review is imperative to ascertain emerging trends in BL This study employs a bibliometric approach, analyzing 1,468 papers from the Scopus database. Various tools including R software, VOS viewer software, and Publish or Perish are utilized. The aim is to portray the knowledge map, explore the publication years, identify the top authors and their co-occurrence, reliable documents, institutions, subjects, research hotspots, and pioneering countries and universities in the study of BL. The qualitative section of this research identifies gaps and emerging trends in BL through Word Cloud charts, word growth analysis, and a review of highly cited articles from the past four years. Results showed that highly cited articles mention topics such as brand love, consumer-brand identification, and social networks and the U.S. had the most productions in this field. Besides, most citations were related to Keller with 1,173 citations. Furthermore, in the qualitative section, social networks and brand experiences were found to be of interest to researchers in the field. Finally, by introducing the antecedents and consequences of BL, the gaps and emerging trends in BL were identified, so as to present the direction of future research in this area. Keywords: Brand Loyalty, Bibliometric Analysis, Content Analysis, Performance Analysis, Map Analysis, Content Analysis, Scopus. conclusion The present research was conducted for providing a systematic overview of BL to present its history and future prospective. Using advanced bibliometric techniques, the researchers created a database of main complementary studies based on Scopus. By applying filters, 1,468 documents were accordingly made available to the researchers. They examined a number of performance components such as author, publication, country, and university. After plotting scientific maps, the researchers specified the roadmap for future studies to determine intellectual structure in BL. The trend of publications on BL was first reviewed and it was then found that this domain continues to grow, being of interest to researchers. Influential articles in BL with highest number of citations were then identified, being addressed in highly cited articles on brand love, brand special value, and social media. Bagizi and Wang were also found influential authors. The publications related to this domain based on total number of citations and h-index were assessed. It was found that the Journal of Business Research received the most citations with a high hindex in BL. In the following, the most effective organizations and countries within this domain are introduced. Results showed that USA had both the most production and citations followed by Asian countries with high production in BL, indicating that it is highly considered by researchers in Asia so that in the review of institutions, South Korean and Australian universities had larger numbers of productions. In network analysis and scientific maps section, the co-word map with four clusters was plotted. The most frequent words were then "BL", "brand value", and "brand trust". Collaboration between authors showed that the cooperation of countries producing articles within the field of BL was steady between authors from USA and South Korea. These two countries have remarkable impacts on this field, while there is scattered collaboration between authors in this domain. The co-authorship network also showed that Keller, Hair, and Aaker had the highest cocitation in BL domain, respectively. In the meantime, the highest number of citations in BL articles was related to works by Keller with 1,173 citations. Finally, by analyzing keywords in BL in both forms of WordCloud and word growth, it was found that social media and brand experience are of interest for researchers in this domain, being observed in both WordClouds. Therefore, further growth of articles in BL centered on social media will be observed in coming years. Review of keywords also showed that there has been no work in this domain related to COVID-19 pandemic. Analyzing highly cited articles over the last four years (mostly addressing
tourism and hoteling industries) using covariance-based software indicated that their methodologies were quantitative. Influential factors and the most frequent outcomes of BL were also recognized in these articles. The paper contributed to the literature by providing a comprehensive and updated overview of BL research, and by highlighting the opportunities and challenges for future studies. 