Production planning must account for uncertainty in a production system, arising from fluctuating demand forecasts. Therefore, this article focuses on the integration of updated customer demand into the rolling horizon planning cycle. We use scenario-based stochastic programming to solve capacitated lot sizing problems under stochastic demand in a rolling horizon environment. This environment is replicated using a discrete event simulation-optimization framework, where the optimization problem is periodically solved, leveraging the latest demand information to continually adjust the production plan. We evaluate the stochastic optimization approach and compare its performance to solving a deterministic lot sizing model, using expected demand figures as input, as well as to standard Material Requirements Planning (MRP). In the simulation study, we analyze three different customer behaviors related to forecasting, along with four levels of shop load, within a multiitem and multi-stage production system. We test a range of significant parameter values for the three planning methods and compute the overall costs to benchmark them. The results show that the production plans obtained by MRP are outperformed by deterministic and stochastic optimization. Particularly, when facing tight resource restrictions and rising uncertainty in customer demand, the use of stochastic optimization becomes preferable compared to deterministic optimization. 1.In this section, we summarize the results presented so far. Table 4 provides an overview of the respective performance of the three approaches across different utilizations, customer demand update patterns and demand variations. We display the cost values and best performing parameter sets, out of the evaluated settings. Moreover for each planning situation, meaning a combination of customer type, demand variation and utilization, we report the relative cost difference (%∆) of the best planning approach in percentage compared to standard MRP. The best performing model for each planning situation is highlighted in bold. For each planning approach we observe an increase in average overall costs with higher utilization. This is reasonable, since tight resource capacities restrict the opportunities of the planning methods and lead to costly delays. We summarize that
the use of optimization models does not yield an advantage over standard MRP for reliable customers (type A) that do not change their demands in the short term, as long as resource utilization is moderately low (85% and 90%). We again highlight that the stochastic model is equivalent to the deterministic version for Customer A and we therefore only report the results of the deterministic model. In case of higher utilizations (95% and 98%) applying MRP is problematic even for the reliable Customer A if demand variation is high, leading to an irregular demand pattern that causes short term bottlenecks in the production system. The use of optimization approaches that consider the available resource capacities can counteract these bottlenecks and reduce the resulting costs by up to 13% in the 95% utilization case and up to 37% in the 98% utilization case. Customer B updates demands once in the short term. This leads to delays if the amount of produced items is not sufficient to satisfy the realized demand and causes higher inventories in case of low demand realizations. We summarize that for Customer B the use of deterministic models using safety stocks is most efficient in case of low resource utilization (85% and 90%) across all demand variations. The availability of buffer capacity allows the method to counteract increasing demand variation by producing higher safety stocks. Significant cost reductions of up to 50% over standard MRP are possible. When considering higher utilization environments (95% and 98%) we observe a shift towards the stochastic optimization model. Tight capacity limitations are problematic for the creation of large safety stocks and cause a decline in the deterministic performance. Especially for large demand variations, planning by means of the stochastic optimization model outperforms the deterministic approach. Finally, Customer C updates demands frequently representing the highest level of demand uncertainty. For this customer type we see a superior performance of the stochastic planning approach across all utilizations and demand variations. Despite relying on large safety stocks, the deterministic model is not able to provide production plans that are suited for the uncertain environment. Customer C highlights the ability of the stochastic optimization model to explicitly incorporate information on uncertain future demand realizations during the planning procedure. Leveraging stochastic optimization in highly uncertain demand settings, as they are modelled by customer type C, can lead to cost reductions of over 50% compared to standard MRP. 6. conclusion In this work we combine a stochastic optimization model for multi-item multi-echelon capacitated lot sizing with discrete-event simulation in order to generate a rolling horizon production planning framework. Making use of stochastic optimization allows to explicitly consider customer demand fluctuations in the lot sizing process. We compare the stochastic planning approach to a deterministic optimization model using mean demands, as well as to a standard MRP approach. We evaluate the different planning methods by means of the developed discrete-event simulation environment and report the resulting overall costs. From a managerial perspective we conclude that the standard MRP approach is sufficient in case of production environments with low resource utilization and customer demands that underlie almost no uncertainty, meaning that the realized demands correspond to the forecasted values. In case of tight resource restrictions, the MRP approach is unable to anticipate capacity bottlenecks, caused by irregular demand patterns, even though demands do not change in the short term. For this scenario
the use of optimization approaches helps to smooth the utilization of resources and counteracts the occurrence of bottlenecks. In situations where customers change their forecasted demands last minute, standard MRP is not competitive with the use of optimization models. While solving a deterministic model using safety stocks works well for scenarios with low utilization, its effectiveness diminishes in situations with tight resource capacities. In contrast, using stochastic optimization takes into account demand uncertainty, creating a bridge to more effective production plans that remain robust even under high levels of utilization. This is especially true if customers frequently update their demand forecasts implying a high level of uncertainty for future demands. 