This paper considers the main challenges for all components engaged in the driving task suggested by the automation of road vehicles or autonomous cars. Numerous autonomous vehicle developers often invest an important amount of time and effort in fine-tuning and measuring the route tracking to obtain reliable tracking performance over a wide range of autonomous vehicle speed and road curvature diversities. However, a number of automated vehicles were not considered for fault-tolerant trajectory tracking methods. Motivated by this, the current research study of the Differential Lyapunov Stochastic and Decision Defect Tree Learning (DLS-DFTL) method is proposed to handle fault detection and course tracking for autonomous vehicle problems. Initially, Differential Lyapunov Stochastic Optimal Control (SOC) with customizable Z-matrices is to precisely design the path tracking for a particular target vehicle while successfully managing the noise and fault issues that arise from the localization and path planning. With the autonomous vehicle’s low ceilings, a recommendation trajectory generation model is created to support such a safety justification. Then, to detect an unexpected deviation caused by a fault, a fault detection technique known as Decision Fault Tree Learning (DFTL) is built. The DLS-DFTL method can be used to find and locate problems in expansive, intricate communication networks. We conducted various tests and showed the applicability of DFTL. By offering some analysis of the experimental outcomes, the suggested method produces significant accuracy. In addition to a thorough study that compares the results to state-of-the-art techniques, simulation was also used to quantify the rate and time of defect detection. The experimental result shows that the proposed DLS-DFTL enhances the fault detection rate (38%), reduces the loss rate (14%), and has a faster fault detection time (24%) than the state of art methods. 1. conclusions In this paper, we proposed a powerful Differential Lyapunov Stochastic and Decision Fault Tree Learning (DLS-DFTL) paradigm for tracking vehicle dynamics and handling in the presence of faults. The proposed DLS-DFTL method was designed based on the Differential Lyapunov Stochastic Optimal Control (SOC) with a Variable Z-Matrix model and Decision Fault Tree Autonomous Vehicle Fault Detection algorithm. At first, the Luenberger observer combined the best features of the continuous linear model. Differential Lyapunov Stochastic Optimal Control Localization and Path Tracking were implemented for the autonomous vehicle to achieve reliable performance in the presence of disturbances. Afterward, Decision Fault Tree Learning (DFTL) was applied for early problem identification in autonomous vehicles. The DLS-DFTL approach was applied in Python for precise validation. The numerical results showed that the DLS-DFTL approach outperformed with full proof trajectory tracking, which is capable of monitoring effectively in the literature. Due to the lower loss rate and fault detection time, the DLS-DFTL approach achieved better performance in terms of fault detection rate, fault detection time, and loss rate. Finally, we also showed that the average loss of the proposed mechanisms was very small.