Background As providers look to scale high-acuity care in the patient home setting, hospital-at-home is becoming more prevalent. The traditional model of hospital-at-home usually relies on care delivery by in-home providers, caring for patients in urban communities through academic medical centers. Our objective is to describe the process and outcomes of Mayo Clinic’s Advanced Care at Home (ACH) program, a hybrid virtual and in-person hospital-at-home model combining a single, virtual provider-staffed command center with a vendor-mediated in-person medical supply chain to simultaneously deliver care to patients living near an urban hospital-at-home command center and patients living in a rural region in a different US state and time zone. Methods A descriptive, retrospective medical records review of all patients admitted to ACH between July 6, 2020, and December 31, 2021. Patients were admitted to ACH from an urban academic medical center in Florida and a rural community hospital in Wisconsin. We collected patient volumes, age, sex, race, ethnicity, insurance type, primary hospital diagnosis, 30-day mortality rate, in-program mortality, 30-day readmission rate, rate of return to hospital during acute phase, All Patient Refined-Diagnosis Related Groups (APR-DRG) Severity of Illness (SOI), and length of stay (LOS) in both the inpatient-equivalent acute phase and post-acute equivalent restorative phase. Results Six hundred and eighty-six patients were admitted to the ACH program, 408 in Florida and 278 in Wisconsin. The most common diagnosis seen were infectious pneumonia (27.0%), septicemia / bacteremia (11.5%), congestive heart failure exacerbation (11.5%), and skin and soft tissue infections (6.3%). Median LOS in the acute phase was 3 days (IQR 2–5) and median stay in the restorative phase was 22 days (IQR 11–26). In-program mortality rate was 0% and 30-day mortality was 0.6%. The mean APR-DRG SOI was 2.9 (SD 0.79) and the 30-day readmission rate was 9.7%. Conclusions The ACH hospital-at-home model was able to provide both high-acuity inpatient-level care and postacute care to patients in their homes through a single command center to patients in urban and rural settings in two different geographical locations with favorable outcomes of low mortality and hospital readmissions. *Correspondence: Michael J. Maniaci maniaci.michael@mayo.edu Full list of author information is available at the end of the article Page 2 of 10 Paulson et al. BMC Health Services Research (2023) 23:139 conclusions The Advanced Care at Home model delivers high-acuity, inpatient-level care at home to patients with a high severity of illness score. ACH simultaneously supports patients in both urban and rural sites with care overseen by a single telehealth medical command center, diverging from previously reported models in urban, academic centers. Patient outcomes of both sites were similar, particularly relevant for rural hospitals facing challenges in supporting hospitalized patients in their communities. The ACH program takes lessons from previously published hospital-at-home studies while fine-tuning the model to expand access to care by connecting hospitalized patients in their homes to healthcare team members in a virtual-staffed command center. Abbreviations ACH Advanced Care at Home RNs Registered nurses APPs Advanced practice providers ED Emergency department SOI Severity of Illness APR-DRG All Patient Refined-Diagnosis Related Groups