There is growing interest in the relationship between neighborhood social capital and the health of urban older people, but existing research still falls short in exploring the relationship between the two. Based on 2018 CHARLS data, this paper quantitatively examines the association between neighborhood social capital and the self-rated health of urban older people. The study found that, after controlling for a series of variables, both increased social interaction and increased frequency of social interaction significantly improved urban older people’s self-rated health. To implement the Health China strategy and improve the health of urban older people, further attention should be paid to the role of neighborhood social capital, creating a harmonious environment for neighborhood interaction and promoting the cultivation of neighborhood social capital. 1. conclusions Previous studies have focused more on the impact of social capital at the level of the individual or larger geographic unit [6–10,14,15,31–33]. However, individuals are likely to be influenced by the communities in which they live their daily lives. Therefore, unlike previous studies [34,35], this paper was based on the analysis of representative data from China and focused on the neighborhood level. Using data from CHARLS2018, we empirically investigated the relationship between neighborhood social capital and the self-rated health of urban older adults. It was found that both social interaction and the frequency of social interaction have a significantly positive association with urban older adults’ self-rated health after controlling for a range of variables, which is consistent with the findings of previous studies [2]. With rapid urbanization and ageing, more and more younger Chinese are moving from the countryside to work and live in the city. A considerable number of young people prefer to pursue their own lifestyles and tend not to live with their parents, which has led to an increasing number of elderly people living alone [36]. This could affect the health of urban elderly. In addition, older people are already at a relative disadvantage in terms of their health status compared to other age groups. This paper confirms a significant positive relationship between neighborhood social capital and the health of urban older
people. The existing literature has analyzed the possible mechanisms of the relationship. A study suggests that neighborhood social capital may contribute to the health of residents by enhancing the ability of communities to provide services [2]. However, the mechanisms of the relationship between neighborhood social capital and the health of urban older people remain to be explored. Further heterogeneity analysis revealed that the frequency of social interaction had a significant correlation with both the self-rated health of urban elderly aged 70 years or above and lower education level. It has been shown that the proportion of older adults experiencing social isolation increases with age and that older adults with low levels of education are at high risk of social isolation [37]. As a psychological resource, social participation can improve an individual’s self-evaluation of health, which could become more pronounced with age [38]. The above findings have important policy value. Considering that self-rated health is seen as a valid measure of health and the significant positive association of neighborhood social capital with urban elderly people’s self-rated health, it is necessary to further emphasize the role of neighborhood social capital, create a harmonious environment of neighborhood interaction, and promote the cultivation of neighborhood social capital to promote the Healthy China Strategy and improve the health of urban elderly people. There are also some limitations in this paper. First, in terms of the measurement of neighborhood social capital, this paper focused on offline social capital, but with the increasing number of Internet users, the possible influence of online social capital on the lives, behavior and health of urban elderly also deserves attention, and future studies can pay more attention to the influence of online social capital on the health status of urban elderly. Second, due to the limitation of cross-sectional data and potential endogeneity issues as a result of possible omitted variables and the interplay between individual selfrated health and social interactions as well as frequency of interactions, it is actually difficult to verify the causal relationship between neighborhood social capital and self-rated health of urban older adults in this study.