Background: Lupus nephritis (LN) is among the most severe organ manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), affecting between 31% and 48% of patients, usually within five years of SLE diagnosis. SLE without LN is associated with a high economic burden on the healthcare system, and although data are limited, several studies have shown that SLE with LN could increase this burden. Aim: We aimed to compare the economic burden of LN versus SLE without LN among patients managed in routine clinical practices in the USA and describe the clinical course of these patients. Materials and methods: This was a retrospective observational study of patients with commercial or Medicare Advantage health insurance. It included 2310 patients with LN and 2310 matched patients who had SLE without LN; each patient was followed for 12 months after diagnosis (the patient’s index date). Outcome measures included healthcare resource utilization (HCRU), direct healthcare costs, and SLE clinical manifestations. Results: In all healthcare settings, the mean (SD) use of all-cause healthcare resources was significantly higher in the LN versus SLE without LN cohort, including the mean number of ambulatory visits (53.9 (55.1) vs 33.0 (26.0)), emergency room visits (2.9 (7.9) vs 1.6 (3.3)), inpatient stays (0.9 (1.5) vs 0.3 (0.8)), and pharmacy fills (65.0 (48.3) vs 51.2 (42.6)) (all p<0.001). Total all-cause costs per patient in the LN cohort were also significantly higher compared with the SLE without LN cohort ($50,975 (86,281) vs $26,262 (52,720), p<0.001), including costs for inpatient stays and outpatient visits. Clinically, a significantly higher proportion of patients with LN experienced moderate or severe SLE flares compared with the SLE without LN cohort (p<0.001), which may explain the difference in HCRU and healthcare costs. Conclusion: All-cause HCRU and costs were higher for patients with LN than for matched patients with SLE without LN, highlighting the economic burden associated with LN. Categories: Nephrology, Rheumatology conclusions This analysis of real-world data from the USA demonstrates that all-cause HCRU and healthcare costs were significantly higher for patients with LN than those with SLE without LN. In particular, patients with LN experienced a higher mean number of ambulatory visits, emergency room visits, inpatient stays, and pharmacy fills compared with patients with SLE without LN. This highlights the substantial additional economic burden associated with LN. The results also demonstrate the increased clinical burden for patients with LN, underscoring the importance of preventing SLE disease worsening and preventing the development of renal manifestations.