A glioma is a malignant brain tumor with a poor prognosis. Attempts at the surgical removal of the tumor are the first approach, but additional treatment strategies, including radiation therapy and systemic or local chemotherapy, are necessary. Furthermore, the treatments are often associated with significant adverse side effects. Normal and malignant cells generally have antigenic differences, and this is the rationale for clinical immunotherapeutic strategies. Cytokines such as IL-15 or IL-2, which stimulate an anti-tumor immune response, have been shown to have a particularly high potential for use in immunotherapy against various tumors. In this review, treatments with either a poxvirus, genetically engineered to secrete IL-15, or allogeneic fibroblasts, transfected with tumor DNA and engineered to secrete IL-2, are shown to be effective strategies in extending the survival of mice with malignant brain tumors upon intracerebral injection of the treatment cells. Future studies with these treatment strategies in patients with intracerebral tumors are urgently needed. 1. conclusions In summary, the data from this study suggest that a poxvirus genetically engineered to secrete IL-15, along with a prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor to block immunosuppression,
Brain Sci. 2023, 13, 1505 9 of 13
is an effective treatment for increasing survival in mice with a malignant glioma. Two different oncolytic poxviruses expressing the IL15Rα-IL15 fusion protein were studied. Cytokines such as IL-2 and IL-15 are beginning to find a role in the management of patients with malignant gliomas [74,75]. Early results, however, have not revealed significant efficacy for prolonging survival in patients with brain tumors through the use various cytokines, including IL-2 and IL-15 [76]. Oncolytic viruses may contribute to the anti-tumor response through direct cytotoxic effects on cancer cells, such that there is a release of tumor antigens which may stimulate an immune response. Previous studies have shown that the oncolytic poxvirus, myxoma virus, is safe to use in mice even when directly injected into the cerebral ventricles [77]. When the virus is engineered to express a cytokine such as IL-15, it can stimulate the local expression of potent immune-activating agents, while avoiding systemic inflammation that parenteral delivery of the cytokine would produce. In this study, IL15 was chosen because it activates and maintains the function of NK and CD8+ T cells [61] with less potential for vascular leakage [78] and less activation of Tregs [79]. In other studies, it was shown that a vaccine prepared by the transfer of a cDNA expression library, derived from tumor cells, into a mouse fibroblast cell line engineered to secrete IL-2 appears to be efficacious in the treatment of a brain tumor. The cDNA integrates spontaneously into the genome of the recipient cells, which is followed by replication and expression. The vaccine requires only a small amount of tumor tissue for preparation and can be given at an early stage of the disease, when the tumor is most susceptible to immune-based therapy. A unique enrichment strategy was also developed, such that the proportion of active immunotherapeutic cells in the vaccine is increased. The use of cells from the enriched vaccine was associated with the development of a strong anti-tumor immune response. The predominant cell type activated in mice immunized with cells from the immunohigh pool were CD4+ T cells. The treatment of a brain tumor with cells from the immunohigh pool also resulted in a reduction in the relative numbers of T-reg cells, with a potential prevention of the impaired anti-tumor immune responses frequently found in patients with malignant brain tumors. The goal of tumor treatment would be the removal of every tumor cell. A single therapy will likely not achieve this goal in the case of brain tumors. However, immunotherapy, in combination with surgical removal of the tumor, radiation therapy and chemotherapy, will likely be involved in the management of patients with brain tumors. The development of DNA-based tumor vaccines, in combination with cytokine secretion, is a novel strategy that does not require antigen identification or protein purification, and yet can elicit a potent and long-lasting activation of the immune response, which will lead to the rejection of the tumor. Only small quantities of tumor-derived DNA, from surgical specimens, are needed to prepare the vaccine. The enrichment strategy represents a unique approach to isolating highly immunogenic pools of transfected cells, which leads to the development of enhanced anti-tumor immunity. Thus DNA-based cytokine-secreting vaccines offer several unique advantages, which support their further development as an immunotherapeutic treatment option for patients with a variety of tumors in general and, in particular, patients with malignant intracerebral tumors.