Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is a very severe X-linked dystrophinopathy. It is due to a mutation in the DMD gene and causes muscular degeneration in conjunction with several secondary co-morbidities, such cardiomyopathy and respiratory failure. DMD is characterized by a chronic inflammatory state, and corticosteroids represent the main therapy for these patients. To contradict drug-related side effects, there is need for novel and more safe therapeutic strategies. Macrophages are immune cells stringently involved in both physiological and pathological inflammatory processes. They express the CB2 receptor, one of the main elements of the endocannabinoid system, and have been proposed as an anti-inflammatory target in several inflammatory and immune diseases. We observed a lower expression of the CB2 receptor in DMD-associated macrophages, hypothesizing its involvement in the pathogenesis of this pathology. Therefore, we analyzed the effect of JWH-133, a CB2 receptor selective agonist, on DMD-associated primary macrophages. Our study describes the beneficial effect of JWH-133 in counteracting inflammation by inhibiting pro-inflammatory cytokines release and by directing macrophages’ phenotype toward the M2 anti-inflammatory one. 1. conclusions In conclusion, we discussed for the first time the inflammatory state of DMD-associated human macrophages in primary cultures and, overall, the involvement of CB2 receptor in the pathogenesis of the typical chronic inflammation affecting these subjects. Our results suggest the possibility to target the CB2 receptor with beneficial therapeutical effects, limiting the release of further pro-inflammatory cytokines and enhancing the differentiation of anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages. In 2019 we demonstrated that in mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) from immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) patients, the co-administration of Dexamethasone—the glucocorticoid most frequently used in ITP patients—with JWH133 resulted in an extremely potentiated anti-inflammatory effect [25]. This synergism could represent a cardinal element in DMD therapy as well, allowing to reduce CCs dosage and consequently the related side effects. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 3345 11 of 13
