Neuro-tourism is the application of neuroscience in tourism to improve marketing methods of the tourism industry by analyzing the brain activities of tourists. Neuro-tourism provides accurate real-time data on tourists’ conscious and unconscious emotions. Neuro-tourism uses the methods of neuromarketing such as brain–computer interface (BCI), eye-tracking, galvanic skin response, etc., to create tourism goods and services to improve tourist experience and satisfaction. Due to the novelty of neuro-tourism and the dearth of studies on this subject, this study offered a comprehensive analysis of the peer-reviewed journal publications in neuro-tourism research for the previous 12 years to detect trends in this field and provide insights for academics. We reviewed 52 articles indexed in the Web of Science (WoS) core collection database and examined them using our suggested classification schema. The results reveal a large growth in the number of published articles on neuro-tourism, demonstrating a rise in the relevance of this field. Additionally, the findings indicated a lack of integrating artificial intelligence techniques in neuro-tourism studies. We believe that the advancements in technology and research collaboration will facilitate exponential growth in this field. 1. conclusions and were left with 59 articles. We added these articles to the online Zotero database to manage, evaluate, and review them. Finally, in the third revision cycle, we read the full text for the remaining 59 articles, and we eliminated 7 more articles because their topics were irrelevant to our theme.  6.2. challenges and future directions This systematic review validated the usefulness of neuro-tourism modalities for documenting the emotional responses of tourists and more solid and trustworthy results for assessing the decision-making of tourists when paired with self-report evaluations. However, this field is not free from difficulties. The following paragraphs discuss the challenges, limitations, and future directions of neuro-tourism. The first major barrier in neuro-tourism is the technology associated with its modalities such as ET, EEG, GSR, or FAC. The development of these hardware sensors is improving in terms of size, portability, system usability, and sensory strength. However, researchers still require guidance and training when dealing with the device for the first time, particularly for EEG devices. Research needs studies to examine different modalities evenly. We discovered most researchers employed ET, while other neuro-tourism techniques, including EGG and head and body movement, need additional research. The price of these technologies may be the cause, but the value of the outcomes obtained will outweigh its cost in the long run. We also anticipate greater study on all various neuro-tourism uses. For instance, tourists’ emotions in pricing and restaurant experience were investigated the least, yet these applications are not less important than others. Additionally, selecting the most powerful stimuli in neuro-tourism studies is important. We discovered that the majority of researchers (87.18%) utilized various visual-based elicitation stimuli for all applications, while other researchers (12.82%) used predefined task stimuli mostly to investigate the tourist experience. However, there are no specific guidelines that determine the most effective stimuli except that the more novel the stimulus is, the more it influences memory [17] by engaging with more of a tourist’s senses. Brain Sci. 2023, 13, 682 17 of 20
The complex nature of human emotions makes it challenging to research several facets of tourists’ emotional responses at one time. Therefore, we recommend employing a triangulation (hybrid) method—a combination of more than one neuro-tourism modality with self-reports—to investigate errors especially if the research wants to evaluate multiple numbers of emotional tourists. 7. conclusions Recently, neuro-tourism has appeared as the application of neuroscience techniques to improve marketing tactics in the tourism industry [4]. With neuro-tourism, we can extract in-the-moment information from the subconscious minds (subjective responses) of visitors, such as emotions underpinning their decisions and attitudes toward tourism-related goods and services. Examples include traveler decisions on various destinations, tourist assessments of how appealing tourism-related products are, tourist opinions regarding the cost of service, tourist satisfaction with accommodations, etc. The goal is to provide tourism services and goods based on the actual tourist subconsciously generated thoughts. Such data cannot be gathered using conventional marketing strategies, e.g., surveys. The results are providing individualized tourism products and achieving better tourist satisfaction. In this study, we systematically analyzed published articles on recognizing emotions in the tourism industry between January 2010 and September 2022. We have developed classifications, discussed the current literature, and provided an analysis for future work. We extracted 52 neuro-tourism articles from 32 different peer-reviewed journals. We read each article and then analyzed and classified them following our classification schema. The novelty of the neuro-tourism field has required both review papers and empirical studies to stand out. Yet, there is a serious need for future research. Our findings found different neuro-tourism modalities used in the literature, such as EEG, ET, HR, GSR, head and body movements, etc. The current advancements in neuroimaging devices open the door for innovations in detecting tourists’ direct emotions and improving services provided in the tourism sector. Based on the findings of this review, we found limitations in using AI methods with neuro-tourism modalities. We anticipate future ML applications for detecting tourist emotions. Such applications will have benefits for both tourists and tourism agencies. Brain Sci. 2023, 13, 682 18 of 20