Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) is a chronic skin inflammatory disease in which blisters and pustules repeatedly develop on palms and soles. PPP is often refractory to topical therapy, oral therapy, phototherapy, and biologics that are usually applied for PPP. We report a patient with PPP improved by vedolizumab (anti-α4β7 integrin antibody) treatment for ulcerative colitis, suggesting the possibility of a new molecular target for PPP therapy. © 2023 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel conclusion Vedolizumab is an anti-α4β7 integrin antibody, which acts against α4β7 integrin on lymphocytes, inhibits lymphocyte adhesion to mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1), and improves inflammatory bowel diseases by suppressing T-cell homing to the gastrointestinal tract. Since the intestinal environment contributes to development of various diseases [3], the improvement of the intestinal environment might alleviate PPP symptoms, although the direct relationship between the intestinal environment and PPP has not been elucidated. In other inflammatory skin diseases such as psoriasis, the expressions of MAdCAM-1 and ITGB7 were not enhanced [4]. However, MAdCAM-1 is not the sole ligand of α4β7 integrin, but α4β7 integrin binds to vascular endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and fibronectin [5]. Since endothelial cells in PPP lesions express VCAM-1 while those in healthy skin do not [6], vedolizumabmight directly improve skin symptoms by acting on endothelial cells in PPP skin lesions to suppress lymphocyte infiltration. Although it is not conclusive whether vedolizumab improved PPP symptoms by its direct action on α4β7 integrin to VCAM-1 interaction or by indirect action through intestinal environment improvement, the present case suggests that vedolizumab would be an option of PPP treatment with a new mode of action. This indirect action might explain the delayed effect of vedolizumab 9 months after the start of therapy. The limitation of this report is that we could not completely reject the possibility of PPP development as a paradoxical reaction of anti-TNF antibody because the patient developed PPP skin lesion after anti-TNF antibody treatment. The median time from starting adalimumab to developing a skin reaction was 12 months [7]. Thus, we thought that the possibility of developing a paradoxical reaction in our case was relatively low because the patient was treated with adalimumab and golimumab for total of 5 months and the skin lesion did not improve evenwith topical treatment after cessation of antiTNF antibody.this case provides the possibility of a newmolecular target for PPP therapy.