This paper presents a very low-profile on-ground chip antenna with a total volume of 0.075λ0 × 0.056λ0 × 0.019λ0 (at f0 = 2.4 GHz). The proposed design is a corrugated (accordion-like) planar inverted F antenna (PIFA) embedded in low-loss glass ceramic material (DuPont GreenTape 9k7 with er = 7.1 and tan δ = 0.0009) fabricated with LTCC technology. The antenna does not require a clearance area on the ground plane where the antenna is located, and it is proposed for 2.4 GHz IoT applications for extreme size-limited devices. It shows a 25 MHz impedance bandwidth (for S11 < −6 dB), which means a relative bandwidth of 1%). A study in terms of matching and total efficiency is performed for several size ground planes with the antenna installed at different positions. The use of characteristic modes analysis (CMA) and the correlation between modal and total radiated fields is performed to demonstrate the optimum position of the antenna. Results show high-frequency stability and a total efficiency difference of up to 5.3 dB if the antenna is not placed at the optimum position. 1.Mode J2 presents a current minimum in the middle of the right/left sides and a current maximum at the top and bottom edges. Mode J3 corresponds to the loop mode, and mode J4 is a higher-order mode, with four current nulls and four maximums. The total currents, including the antenna, are depicted in Figure 8d for a visual comparison between modal and total currents. Regarding the matching of the antenna (see Figure 9a), results show the same stability as in previous studies, with no detuning observed when the antenna is displaced, or the polarization is changed. The total efficiency (Figure 9a) exhibits the highest dynamic range among all the performed studies. On the one hand, the best total efficiency results (−7.6 dB and −7.8 dB) observed in Figure 9a are obtained at positions P1’(x,y) = (0,0) and P2(x,y) = (0,45). By analyzing the correlation (Figure 9b), it can be observed that for P1’(x,y) = (0,0), mode J2 is perfectly excited because the antenna is placed parallel to the top edge, and there is a current maximum flowing in the same direction of the currents of the antenna. For P2(x,y) = (0,45) position, the antenna is clearly exciting mode J1 og the ground plane, because it is placed in the middle of the left and right sides, and since the plane is very thin, both maximums are excited. The next highest value for the total efficiency is obtained for P2’(x,y)= (0,45), where mode J2 is excited but not at the same level, because the antenna is placed in the current minimum. Although it is placed in the maximum for J1, the current flow of the antenna is orthogonal to the currents of this mode. The worst total efficiency value (−12.9 dB) is observed for P1(x,y) = (0,0) positions. The reason for such a low level is that mode J1 has a current minimum and mode J2 has its maximum on the top edge, but it is orthogonal to the current flow of the antenna. Radiation patterns (directivity) for planes φ = 0◦ and φ = 90◦ are also depicted for all the analyzed positions in Figure 9. The information gathered in the last analysis shows that for narrow ground planes, the antenna position has a big impact on the total efficiency. Really high correlation and efficiency values are obtained if the antenna is placed in the correct position, always taking into consideration the current distribution of the modes close to resonance and taking also into consideration the current flow of the antenna. 4. conclusions A low-profile on-ground LTCC chip antenna resonating at 2.41 GHz has been presented. The antenna exhibits a total volume of 0.067× 0.048× 0.019λ30 and does not require a clearance area on the ground plane where it is installed. Characteristic modes analysis of ground planes with different sizes, and the correlation between the total radiated fields (antenna + ground plane) and modal radiated fields (ground plane) were successfully performed, justifying the best position for the antenna location in terms of total efficiency. This study shows that the antenna is really stable to detuning effects and shows a considerable difference in terms of efficiency from the best to the worst position (5.3 dB difference), as described in Table 3. The best results are obtained when the antenna is placed in the middle of the left side of the ground plane, and the reason is demonstrated by the modal analysis. Due to the size of the antenna and the lack of clearance area requirement, this antenna is a great candidate to be installed in extremely size-limited devices working for 2.4 GHz IoT applications.