Waste sorting is a practical way of handling the garbage and an effective strategy for facilitating sustainable waste management. This research extended the theory of planned behavior (TPB) with self-identity and moral norms to predict waste sorting intentions in a heritage context of tourism. A total of 403 valid self-administrated questionnaires were achieved at a heritage destination in China. The results indicated that: (1) TPB variables (i.e., attitudes toward the behavior, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control), self-identity, and moral norms were all directly and positively linked to tourists’ waste sorting intentions, respectively; (2) self-identity indirectly influenced tourists’ waste sorting intentions through the mediation of moral norms; and (3) the integrated model exhibited better predictive utility than any single model. This research contributes to the literature on waste management in the context of tourism by extending TPB with identity and personal normative constructs. It also provides practical implications for destination managers to leverage tourists’ self-identity and moral norms for sustainable management. 1. conclusions, discussion, and implications  5.1. conclusions and discussion Tourists separating waste in heritage sites can essentially help sustain the environment, tourism development, as well as territorial development in the long term [6,107]. By taking self-expressive and personal normative factors into consideration, this study extended the TPB model to investigate the roles of self-identity and moral norms in explaining tourists’ intentions to separate waste in the heritage destinations. Results of the SEM analysis indicated that all the proposed hypotheses in this study were confirmed. The results indicated that three TPB constructs (i.e., attitudes toward the behavior, subjective norms and perceived behavioral control) all positively and directly affected tourists’ waste sorting intentions, confirming H1, H2, and H3. These results are aligned with prior studies by Gao et al. and Cao et al. in investigating tourists’ pro-environmental behavioral intentions and specific behavioral intentions, respectively [7,55]. This study thus further validated the explanatory value of TPB in explaining tourists’ pro-environmental behavioral intentions and waste sorting intentions. Specifically, it indicates that tourists will form intentions to classify waste if they hold more positive attitudes toward waste sorting. A higher level of social pressure from others or perception of sufficient knowledge or skills for adopting the behavior will lead to the same results. Accordingly, TPB is reconfirmed to be a feasible theoretical foundation for predicting tourists’ waste sorting intentions in the heritage tourism setting [31]. Furthermore, we have also investigated how tourists’ self-identity influenced their waste sorting intentions and moral norms. The results suggested that tourists’ self-identity was positively associated with their waste sorting intentions (H4 was supported). This is consistent with previous endeavors of Chan et al. and Lee et al. whose studies indicate that one’s self-identity is crucial in promoting their pro-environmental behaviors or intentions related to one’s certain specific label in the social structure [26,62]. Unlike the emphasis on the effects of tourists’ social network on their behavioral intentions [7], this results underscored the importance of self-expressive factor (i.e., self-identity) in triggering their specific pro-environmental behavioral intentions. In addition, our results also suggested that H5 was confirmed, which further verified a positive effect of self-identity on moral norms. This is in line with findings of prior studies [34,39], which found that visitors’ moral norms to behave sustainably can be provoked when they define themselves as pro-environmental people. Lastly, we examined the association between tourists’ moral norms and their waste sorting intentions. The results showed that moral norms were positively related to visitors’ waste sorting intentions (i.e., H6 was confirmed). This agrees with the findings of the existing literature on how tourists’ moral considerations influence their pro-environmental behavioral intentions [42], as well as a series of sustainable waste disposal intentions in multiple settings [38,71,73]. Furthermore, the mediating effect analysis was conducted to test the indirect path from self-identity to tourists’ waste sorting intentions via their moral norms. The results confirmed the mediating effect, i.e., H7 was supported. This is consistent with the findings of recent studies on pro-environmental behavioral intentions [40,69]. This means that one’s belief of ‘who I am’ drives them to change their moral sentiments and subsequently their behavioral intentions. Specifically, the extent to which tourists see themselves as waste sorters enhances their moral obligations, which further develops their intentions to sort waste for maintaining their own self-identity. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 5099 13 of 19 5.2. theoretical contributions Based on TPB, this current research probed the factors that help the formation of tourists’ waste sorting intentions by adding self-identity and moral norms. In this regard, the findings of this study contributed to the research on pro-environmental behavior and behavioral intention in the following ways. This research made an effort to expand our knowledge of how TPB can be integrated with the identity theory and moral norms to explain one’s intentions of waste sorting in a context of tourism. This study constituted a robust conceptual theoretical framework with several variables drawn from multiple theories or models, e.g., the identity theory and the norm activation model. To be specific, the key elements of this conceptual model include volitional and non-volitional factors in TPB, the self-expressive factor (i.e., self-identity) in the identity theory, and personal normative factors (i.e., moral norms) in the norm activation model. There have been a few attempts to extend TPB with other theories or constructs in the research on tourists’ waste disposal behaviors and intentions, including tourists’ binning behaviors [42], waste reduction intentions [71], and waste sorting intentions [7]. However, the primary focal point of these studies is on the impact of personal normative factors or social network. However, there is oversight of tourists’ identity perspective in the extended TPB framework. Therefore, the present study extended the existing literature with the addition of the self-identity and deepened our understanding of the formation of waste sorting intentions amongst tourists. Furthermore, the findings contributed to the current body of knowledge through investigating the role of moral norms in mediating the effect of self-identity on tourists’ waste sorting intentions. The importance of self-identity and moral norms in stimulating tourists’ pro-environmental behavioral intentions has been separately acknowledged by previous research [42,60,62]. However, the interrelationship between self-identity and moral norms still needs more empirical evidence in explaining specific pro-environmental behavioral intentions [26], particularly waste sorting intentions in the context of tourism. Our results confirmed the mediating role of personal moral norms, which provided more insights into the transformation from one’s self-identity into waste sorting intentions. It corroborates the views in previous studies that one’s self-identity reinforces their moral obligations, which in turn impose impact on corresponding behaviors [36,37]. To sum up, this finding furthered our understanding of the sequential causal relationship between self-identity, moral norms, and waste sorting intentions in the context of tourism. 5.3. managerial implications TPB was extended with self-identity and moral norms to understand the development of tourists’ waste sorting intentions in this research. Apart from the aforementioned theoretical implications, the findings also provided a number of practical implications which may help destination managers and other public agencies encourage tourists to engage in waste sorting. First, similar to other research findings [8,9], three TPB constructs (i.e., attitudes toward the behavior, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control) were confirmed to be effective in predicting tourists’ waste sorting intentions. This implies that visitors should be informed that their actions do make a difference in maintaining the environmental integrity of the destinations. For example, social media influencers or popular public figures can be invited to participate in producing the promotion video of the destination. Their advocacy of environmental protection or waste sorting may raise tourists’ awareness of proper waste disposal. Volunteers can be recruited to assist waste sorting at the destination. Prosocial actions of the volunteers may inspire tourists and improve their perception of social pressure. To improve tourists’ sense of volitional control over waste sorting, destination managers and local administrative agencies can collaborate to ease the difficulties of waste sorting. Feasible measures can include displaying posters advocating waste sorting and distributing more garbage bins in conspicuous places. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 5099 14 of 19
Second, the direct and indirect routes from tourists’ self-identity to their waste sorting intentions underlined the significant predictive ability of self-identity in shaping tourists’ behavioral intentions. This suggested that useful interventions could be developed to facilitate the establishment or enhancement of tourists’ self-identity as waste sorting travelers. Since tourists’ self-identity reflects how they position their own social roles, the destination and public agencies could cooperate to improve tourists’ level of self-identity via various forms. For instance, the public should be guided to sort waste in the unhabitual environment through environmental education campaigns by public agencies. For destinations, publicity videos, waste sorting posters, or reminders should be displayed at different venues to imperceptibly influence tourists’ self-image. Overall, the goal of these strategies is to cultivate tourists’ perception of being the type of people who intend to dispose their garbage properly. Lastly, considering the critical role of people’s internalized values (i.e., moral norms) in forming the intentions of waste sorting [73], effective communication strategies should be developed to reinforce their moral obligations to sort waste. The role of moral norms as direct determinants of visitors’ waste sorting intentions and the mediator between selfidentity and behavioral intentions provide solid ground for this managerial implication. As people’s view of the world are the foundation of their moral obligations [63], the purpose of these communication tactics is to influence or change people’s view of and their relationship with the world. For example, brochures or information in other forms (e.g., audio or visual) should be available which enable visitors to realize the damages of irresponsible waste disposal inflicted on the environment. When tourists become aware of the impact of their behaviors on the environment, they may feel morally obligated to preserve the environment for harmonious coexistence. 6. limitations and future research directions Despite the potential contributions and implications to the academic community and destination managers, there were some limitations in this research. First, this research employed the SEM method for empirical analysis. However, an increasing number of scholars begin to apply more diverse approaches in tourism research. For example, a growing body of literature has turned to conducting experiments [108,109]. Others have tried mixed methods that combine with fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis, focus groups, or in-depth interviews [110–112]. Such methodologies can be the alternatives for future research. Second, the field survey was conducted at only one site due to the epidemic prevention policies implemented (between October and November of 2022). In order to improve the stability and applicability of the conceptual model, future research should consider two or more case studies for cross-validation [113]. Lastly, since tourists may behave differently at home and destinations [10], more empirical evidence is required to validate the influence of the habitual and unhabitual environments.