Cancer poses a significant global health problem with profound personal and economic implications on National Health Care Systems. The reprograming of metabolism is a major trait of the cancer phenotype with a clear potential for developing effective therapeutic strategies to combat the disease. Herein, we summarize the relevant role that the mitochondrial ATP synthase and its physiological inhibitor, ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1 (IF1), play in metabolic reprogramming to an enhanced glycolytic phenotype. We stress that the interplay in the ATP synthase/IF1 axis has additional functional roles in signaling mitohormetic programs, pro-oncogenic or anti-metastatic phenotypes depending on the cell type. Moreover, the same axis also participates in cell death resistance of cancer cells by restrained mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening. We emphasize the relevance of the different post-transcriptional mechanisms that regulate the specific expression and activity of ATP synthase/IF1, to stimulate further investigations in the field because of their potential as future targets to treat cancer. In addition, we review recent findings stressing that mitochondria metabolism is the primary altered target in lung adenocarcinomas and that the ATP synthase/IF1 axis of OXPHOS is included in the most significant signature of metastatic disease. Finally, we stress that targeting mitochondrial OXPHOS in pre-clinical mouse models affords a most effective therapeutic strategy in cancer treatment. 1. conclusions and future directions Despite major genetic advances in the understanding of cancer, cancer patients still require the development of innovative therapeutic strategies matched to the phenotype of their tumors to halt progression of the disease. The accumulated evidence indicates that the metabolic reprogramming experienced in cancer provides new biomarkers that, alone or in combination, could be exploited to halt the disease in a successful personalized medicine. In this review, we have summarized the different functions that the mitochondrial ATP synthase and its inhibitor protein, IF1, play in cellular biology and in cancer progression. We have overviewed the mechanism by which the ATP synthase/IF1 axis contributes to metabolic reprogramming to an enhanced glycolytic phenotype, both in cancer cells and in the maintenance of stemness, and its potential both as biomarkers of prognosis and as targets for therapy. Moreover, we have highlighted how the ATP synthase/IF1 axis contributes to the signaling of cell-type specific programs that allow the adaptation of the cell/organisms to different changing cues, and finally, how the ATP synthase/IF1 axis also participates in preventing the execution of cell death and hence, in therapeutic resistance of the carcinomas. We have emphasized that the relative low activity of mitochondrial metabolic pathways, such as OXPHOS and β-oxidation in lung adenocarcinomas, contribute to cancer progression. In fact, the analysis of the expression of enzymes of metabolism revealed that the alteration of mitochondria is a most evident target in lung adenocarcinomas, and both the catalytic subunit of ATP synthase (β-F1-ATPase) and IF1, provide two most relevant biomarkers of metastatic disease. Actually, and depending on the type of carcinoma, the expression levels of IF1 define its activity as a tumor suppres-
Cancers 2023, 15, 3775 17 of 26
sor or as an oncogene. Although the glycolytic phenotype is needed for tumor growth, metastatic disease requires the activity of OXPHOS, i.e., relatively high β-F1-ATPase expression in the carcinoma. However, the activity of ATP synthase is counterbalanced by enhanced expression levels of IF1 that exert tumor suppressor activities in some carcinomas. Hence, targeting mitochondrial ATP synthase and IF1 holds great promise for overcoming therapeutic resistance and impeding metastatic disease. We have emphasized the mechanisms that control the expression and activity of β-F1-ATPase and IF1 in cancer, which show similarities with those operating in development and differentiation, to highlight the relevance that post-transcriptional mechanisms play in the regulation of the mitochondrial phenotype of mammalian tissues and carcinomas. Unfortunately, this is a field that is scarcely investigated, but that could illuminate new biomarkers and therapeutic targets for cancer treatment. Finally, we summarize recent preclinical findings of the potential that OXPHOS and β-oxidation have as targets to prevent cancer progression.