To fulfil the growing needs of the global population, sustainability in food production must be ensured. Insect pests and pathogens are primarily responsible for one-third of food losses and harmful synthetic pesticides have been applied to protect crops from these pests and other pathogens such as viruses and fungi. An alternative pathogen control mechanism that is more “friendly” to the environment can be developed by externally applying double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) to suppress gene expression. However, the use of dsRNA sprays in open fields is complicated with respect to variable efficiencies in the dsRNA delivery, and the stability of the dsRNA on and in the plants, and because the mechanisms of gene silencing may differ between plants and between different pathogen targets. Thus, nanocarrier delivery systems have been especially used with the goal of improving the efficacy of dsRNAs. Here, we highlight recent developments in nanoparticle-mediated nanocarriers to deliver dsRNA, including layered double hydroxide, carbon dots, carbon nanotubes, gold nanoparticles, chitosan nanoparticles, silica nanoparticles, liposomes, and cell-penetrating peptides, by review of the literature and patent landscape. The effects of nanoparticle size and surface modification on the dsRNA uptake efficiency in plants are also discussed. Finally, we emphasize the overall limitation of dsRNA sprays, the risks associated, and the potential safety concerns for spraying dsRNAs on crops. 1. conclusions and future direction The topical application of dsRNA as active molecules presents a highly versatile crop management strategy that does not require plant transformation methods. Since naked dsRNAs are susceptible to degradation upon exposure to the environment, dsRNAs can be encapsulated or layered with biocompatible nanoparticles to prolong the RNA stability and increase silencing efficiency when applied in field-like conditions. However, the design and selection of RNA carriers will depend on several factors such as the RNA size (e.g., siRNAs and long dsRNAs), the target (e.g., fungi, insects, endogenous plant genes and viruses) and the method of delivery (e.g., trunk injection, spraying, petiole adsorption, etc.). This work reviewed a selection of nanocarrier delivery systems and their use, such as LDH, CD, CNT, gold nanoparticles, chitosan nanoparticles, silica nanoparticles, liposomes and CPP. The use of these nanocarriers allows dsRNAs to be more stable and efficient when applied in open fields. Despite the promising potential of topical RNAi technology, there are limitations, potential risks and safety concerns in relation to the technology that need to be addressed. Potential off-target effects, uncertainties in the fate of dsRNAs and regulation of the technology, as well as the high production cost of the dsRNAs, may limit the commercial potential of the technology. More importantly, good governance of topical RNAi technology demands a greater corporate responsibility that requires continuous dialogues with relevant stakeholders and that devotes more attention towards addressing ethical issues and societal costs of the technology.