Lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4, LFP) is the most promising cathode material for use in safe electric vehicles (EVs), due to its long cycle stability, low cost, and low toxicity, but it suffers from low conductivity and ion diffusion. In this work, we present a simple method to obtain LFP/carbon (LFP/C) composites with different types of NC: cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) and cellulose nanofiber (CNF). Microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis was used to obtain LFP with nanocellulose inside the vessel, and the final LFP/C composite was achieved by heating the mixture under a N2 atmosphere. The resulting LFP/C indicated that the NC in the reaction medium not only acts as the reducing agent that aqueous iron solutions need (avoiding the use of other chemicals), but also as a stabiliser of the nanoparticles produced in the hydrothermal synthesis, obtaining fewer agglomerated particles compared to synthesis without NC. The sample with the best coating—and, therefore, the best electrochemical response—was the sample with 12.6% carbon derived from CNF in the composite instead of CNC, due to its homogeneous coating. The utilisation of CNF in the reaction medium could be a promising method to obtain LFP/C in a simple, rapid, and low-cost way, avoiding the waste of unnecessary chemicals. 1. conclusions When adding NC to the synthesis process, the resulting composites (LFP/C) exhibit better intensity of the crystalline face responsible for lithium diffusion, smaller particle
Polymers 2023, 15, 2628 13 of 16
size (with both types of NC), and better electrochemical performance in comparison to LFP synthesised without carbon, due to the carbon coating created by the NC after heat treatment. Between the two NCs used, CNC exhibited better diffraction peaks in XRD than CNF, but we observed wide peaks with CNF, indicating smaller crystallites and, consequently, smaller particles, as evidenced by the FE-SEM images. Comparing the different percentages of NC used, it should be noted that small percentages (i.e., 0.15% wt. NC) can lead to unwanted diffraction peaks due to the possibility of iron oxidation when a small amount of NC is carbonised. In contrast, with a high percentage of NC (i.e., 1% wt. ), no unwanted diffraction peaks were observed, but this does not guarantee a proportional decrease in average particle size, and in some cases with CNC an increase in particle size was observed. Both NCs carbonised to carbon in an inert atmosphere, but through Raman and elemental analysis of the carbon we concluded that CNC decomposes faster than CNF, leading to increase in particle size and a decrease in the final amount of carbon obtained (% wt. carbon in LFP/C composite) when using the same percentage of each NC in the reactor vessel, which is consistent with the results of CV experiments with the same amount of final carbon. As a consequence, the use of CNF instead of CNC in the LFP synthesis shows promising characteristics for use as a cathode: the composite created at 150 ◦C for 30 min with 1% wt. CNF had 12.6% wt. carbon after heat treatment. The electrochemical characterisations of the composite showed improved behaviour compared with the LFP synthesised without carbon, confirming that the coating of the LFP particles improves the Li+ intercalation behaviour, while a reduced particle size improves the voltammetry profile and the charge–discharge curves. Through the XPS spectra, it can be seen that the synthesised composite (LFP/C) exhibits only Fe2+ species, while after cycling a coin cell of this compound, other iron species such as Fe3+ and Fe0 can be observed, indicating that inactive species are formed once the coin cell is cycled, which may be responsible for the specific capacity achieved. Through this proposed synthesis route, we can easily obtain an LFP/C composite, avoiding unnecessary chemicals and multiple steps, and the resultant material shows promise for use as a cathode due to its small particle size (95 nm), carbon coating, and good electrochemical behaviour according to cyclic voltammetry.