Emerging evidence demonstrates that alterations to the gut microbiota can affect mood, suggesting that the microbiota–gut–brain (MGB) axis contributes to the pathogenesis of depression. Many of these pathways overlap with the way in which the gut microbiota are thought to contribute to metabolic disease progression and obesity. In rodents, prebiotics and probiotics have been shown to modulate the composition and function of the gut microbiota. Together with germ-free rodent models, probiotics have provided compelling evidence for a causal relationship between microbes, microbial metabolites, and altered neurochemical signalling and inflammatory pathways in the brain. In humans, probiotic supplementation has demonstrated modest antidepressant effects in individuals with depressive symptoms, though more studies in clinically relevant populations are needed. This review critically discusses the role of the MGB axis in depression pathophysiology, integrating preclinical and clinical evidence, as well as the putative routes of communication between the microbiota–gut interface and the brain. A critical overview of the current approaches to investigating microbiome changes in depression is provided. 1. conclusion and perspectives for future research The microbiota–gut–brain axis is mediated by a complex network of neural, endocrine, and immune signalling pathways, as well as by the release of various metabolites and neurotransmitters that can influence both gut function and brain function [1]. In both healthy [57] and diseased rodent models [37], the gut microbiota and associated metabolites have been demonstrated to regulate brain development, plasticity, and behaviour. In humans, dysfunction of the microbiota–gut–brain axis through obesity and metabolic disease has been implicated in a range of psychiatric and neurological disorders, including depression [83]. Prebiotics and probiotics, through their modulation of the gut microbiome, have emerged as potential therapeutic options for the management of depression [2]. While more research is needed to fully understand the complex mechanisms underlying this relationship, the evidence so far suggests that interventions targeting the gut microbiota have not been convincingly translated in clinical trials, though more studies are required in patients with moderate to severe symptoms. Ultimately, a comprehensive approach to mental health should take into account the bidirectional relationship between the gut and brain, and consider the potential role of prebiotics and probiotics in promoting optimal gut health and overall well-being. Moreover, the use of prebiotics and probiotics is relatively safe and well-tolerated, making them an attractive option for individuals who are looking for natural and noninvasive interventions for depression. It is important to note, however, that not all prebiotics and probiotics are created equal, and their efficacy and safety may vary depending on the specific strain, dose, and formulation. Depending on the positioning of the labelling at each carbon atom, the
Nutrients 2023, 15, 1880 21 of 28
kinetics of different metabolic pathways can be inferred following prebiotic and probiotic treatments [174].