Background Due to the persistence of tobacco-related health disparities in the U.S., there is a need for innovative strategies to reach the underserved ethnic minority populations who are most at risk. As contemplations for health behavior modification tend to surge on Mondays, we explored the feasibility and effect of a Monday-enhanced smoking cessation program on quitting outcomes in a low-income ethnic minority community. Aims To compare a Monday-enhanced with a standard Communities Engaged and Advocating for a Smoke-free Environment (CEASE) program and understand the overall experiences of participants in the program. Methods In this mixed-methods study, affordable housing complexes (n = 4) and a church were randomly assigned either a Monday-enhanced (n = 3) or standard (n = 2) CEASE smoking cessation program. CEASE comprised twelve weekly group counseling sessions facilitated by trained peer motivators plus nicotine replacement products. Participants in the Mondayenhanced arm were encouraged to pick Mondays as a quitting day. Quantitative and qualitative data were collected during the program and at 3-month post-graduation. Results Seventy-seven participants were enrolled in the study arms. In both groups combined, tobacco consumption reduced from 7.7 to 5.6 cig/day (mean reduction, 2.1; 95% CI: 0.9 to 5.1, p = 0.08). Although no significant difference in quit rate was observed between the two arms, more participants completed the follow-up survey in the Monday-enhanced than standard CEASE program [82.4% vs. 36.0%, p < 0.05]. While qualitative data suggested an overall satisfaction of participants with the program, motivation for quitting was higher in the Monday-enhanced CEASE program compared to the standard CEASE program. Conclusion The Monday-enhanced program is promising and may enhance participants’ engagement and willingness to quit smoking, particularly in low-income ethnic minority communities. conclusion Findings from this mixed-methods study were suggestive of a potential effect of the Monday-enhanced CEASE program in improving engagement and willingness to quit smoking in underserved ethnic minority communities in Baltimore City.