To obtain high conversion efficiency, various carrier-selective contact structures are being applied to the silicon solar cell, and many related studies are being conducted. We conducted research on TiO2 to create an electron-selective contact structure that does not require a high-temperature process. Titanium metal was deposited using a thermal evaporator, and an additional oxidation process was conducted to form titanium oxide. The chemical compositions and phases of the titanium dioxide layers were analyzed by X-ray diffraction. The passivation effects of each titanium oxide layer were measured using the quasi-steady-state photoconductance. In this study, the layer properties were analyzed when TiO2 had a passivation effect on the silicon surface. The charge and interface defect densities of the layer were analyzed through CV measurements, and the passivation characteristics according to the TiO2 phase change were investigated. As a result, by applying optimized TiO2 layer thickness and annealing temperature conditions through the experiment for passivation to the cell-like structure, which is the structure before metal and electrode formation, an implied opencircuit voltage (iVoc) of 630 mV and an emitter saturation current density (J0) value of 60.4 fA/cm 2 were confirmed. conclusion An electron-selective titanium oxide layer was fabricated using a thermal evaporator, followed by oxygen annealing. The properties of the titanium oxide layer, such as the passivation property, structures, and electrical property, of the layer formed through the above process were investigated. The passivation property was improved by applying thin silicon oxide (~ 1.4 nm), which is capable of tunneling carriers, and optimizing the Si/SiO2/TiO2 multilayer. For the symmetric structure sample (TiO2/SiO2/n-Si/SiO2/TiO2), ~ 644 mV of iVoc was obtained after 2 nm of Ti deposition and annealed 10 min at 300 °C. GIXRD measurements showed that when the oxidation process was carried out at a temperature below 300 °C, metal peaks were obtained from inside the layer, indicating the poor passivation property of the layer. XRD measurements confirmed that TiO2 was formed without metallic properties when titanium was oxidized at temperatures above 300 °C. The passivation property of the titanium oxide differed depending on the phase of the layer and the annealing time. And, when the thickness of the initially deposited titanium was too thick, a low minority carrier lifetime characteristic was confirmed. CV measurements confirmed that the Qf and Dit of the TiO2 layer did not show significant differences depending on the annealing conditions. A difference in passivation property is expected because of the work function variation that occurs as the phase changes according to the annealing conditions, and this requires additional analysis. The pseudo-efficiency of cell-like structure using oxidized TiO2 layer confirmed 19.5%.