Composite phase change materials commonly exhibit drawbacks, such as low thermal conductivity, flammability, and potential leakage. This study focuses on the development of a novel flame-retardant phase change material (RPCM). The material’s characteristics and its application in the thermal management of lithium-ion batteries are investigated. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) serves as the medium for phase change; expanded graphite (EG) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) are incorporated. Moreover, an intumescent flame retardant (IFR) system based on ammonium polyphosphate (APP) is constructed, aided by the inclusion of bio-based flame-retardant chitosan (CS) and barium phytate (PA-Ba), which can improve the flame retardancy of the material. Experimental results demonstrate that the RPCM, containing 15% IFR content, exhibits outstanding flame retardancy, achieving a V-0 flame retardant rating in vertical combustion tests. Moreover, the material exhibits excellent thermomechanical properties and thermal stability. Notably, the material’s thermal conductivity is 558% higher than that of pure PEG. After 2C and 3C high-rate discharge cycles, the highest temperature reached by the battery module cooled with RPCM is 18.71 ◦C lower than that of natural air-cooling; the material significantly reduces the temperature difference within the module by 62.7%, which achieves efficient and safe thermal management. 1. conclusions are as follows: (1) After the addition of MWCNTs and EG, the material exhibits a significant increase
of 558% in thermal conductivity compared to pure PEG. The addition of CS/APP/PA-Ba flame retardants significantly increased the residual carbon content and flame retardancy of the material while reducing organic leakage, effectively enhancing the thermal stability of PCM. (2) When the flame-retardant content was 15%, the material RPCM2 achieved a V-0 flame retardant rating, with a thermal conductivity of 2.04 W/m·K and a latent heat value of 151.58 W/g. Therefore, RPCM2 not only maintains excellent thermodynamic performance but also exhibits outstanding flame retardancy and good thermal stability. (3) Compared to natural cooling, the use of the novel RPCM as a heat dissipation medium in thermal management demonstrated a significant cooling effect. In a 3C cycle, the battery module experienced a reduction of 18.71 °C in its maximum temperature, and the temperature difference decreased by 62.7% compared to natural cooling. The prepared RPCM in this study provides a reference for the application of bio-based flame retardants in CPCM. Author Contributions: Investigation, Y.G. and J.Z. ; Writing—original draft, Y.G. ; Writing—review & editing, Y.G., Y.C., D.O. and M.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52204213). Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Nomenclature AlN Aluminium nitride APP Ammonium polyphosphate BN Boron nitride BTMS Battery thermal management system
Figure 13. Battery module temperature difference profiles of RPCMs and blank under charging rates of (a) 2C; (b) 3C. 4. conclusions In this study, a novel RPCM was prepared using PEG and bio-based flame retardant. The main conclusions are as follows:
(1) After the addition of MWCNTs and EG, the material exhibits a significant increase of 558% in thermal conductivity compared to pure PEG. The addition of CS/APP/PABa flame retardants significantly increased the residual carbon content and flame retardancy of the material while reducing organic leakage, effectively enhancing the thermal stability of PCM. Polymers 2023, 15, 4450 14 of 16
(2) When the flame-retardant content was 15%, the material RPCM2 achieved a V-0 flame retardant rating, with a thermal conductivity of 2.04 W/m·K and a latent heat value of 151.58 W/g. Therefore, RPCM2 not only maintains excellent thermodynamic performance but also exhibits outstanding flame retardancy and good thermal stability. (3) Compared to natural cooling, the use of the novel RPCM as a heat dissipation medium in thermal management demonstrated a significant cooling effect. In a 3C cycle, the battery module experienced a reduction of 18.71 ◦C in its maximum temperature, and the temperature difference decreased by 62.7% compared to natural cooling.