Wound healing is a complex process that can be further complicated in chronic wounds, leading to prolonged healing times, high healthcare costs, and potential patient morbidity. Nanotechnology has shown great promise in developing advanced wound dressings that promote wound healing and prevent infection. The review article presents a comprehensive search strategy that was applied to four databases, namely Scopus, Web of Science, PubMed, and Google Scholar, using specific keywords and inclusion/exclusion criteria to select a representative sample of 164 research articles published between 2001 and 2023. This review article provides an updated overview of the different types of nanomaterials used in wound dressings, including nanofibers, nanocomposites, silver-based nanoparticles, lipid nanoparticles, and polymeric nanoparticles. Several recent studies have shown the potential benefits of using nanomaterials in wound care, including the use of hydrogel/nano silver-based dressings in treating diabetic foot wounds, the use of copper oxide-infused dressings in difficult-to-treat wounds, and the use of chitosan nanofiber mats in burn dressings. Overall, developing nanomaterials in wound care has complemented nanotechnology in drug delivery systems, providing biocompatible and biodegradable nanomaterials that enhance wound healing and provide sustained drug release. Wound dressings are an effective and convenient method of wound care that can prevent wound contamination, support the injured area, control hemorrhaging, and reduce pain and inflammation. This review article provides valuable insights into the potential role of individual nanoformulations used in wound dressings in promoting wound healing and preventing infections, and serves as an excellent resource for clinicians, researchers, and patients seeking improved healing outcomes. 1. conclusions An injury to the tissue can be more of a challenge with a secondary microbial infection. Many internal and external factors can interrupt the physiology of the healing process, the most significant of which is microbial infection. Appropriately dressing the wound with the help of nanomaterial-impregnated wound dressings could hasten the healing of the injured tissues and prevent the wound from becoming contaminated. Nanotechnology has revolutionized the field of wound healing by providing innovative and effective ways to treat wounds. The development of nanomaterials in wound dressings has shown tremendous potential for promoting wound healing and preventing infections. Clinical studies have shown promising results, with nanoformulations demonstrating improved therapeutic effectiveness, sustained drug release, and reduced healthcare costs.