Background Internal medicine (IM) residency is a notoriously challenging time generally characterized by long work hours and adjustment to new roles and responsibilities. The COVID‐19 pandemic has led to multiple emergent adjust‐ ments in training schedules to accommodate increasing needs in patient care. The physician training period, in itself, has been consistently shown to be associated with vulnerability with respect to mental well‐being. The impact of the COVID‐19 pandemic on the experience of IM trainees is not well established. Objective Characterize the impact of the COVID‐19 pandemic on trainee clinical education, finances, and well‐being. Methods We developed a survey composed of 25 multiple choice questions, 6 of which had an optional short‐ answer component. The survey was distributed by the American College of Physicians (ACP) to 23,289 IM residents and subspecialty fellows. We received 1,128 complete surveys and an additional 269 partially completed surveys. Results The majority of respondents reported a disruption in their clinical schedule (76%) and a decrease in both didactic conferences (71%) and protected time for education (56%). A majority of respondents (81%) reported an impact on their well‐being with an increase in their level of burnout and 41% of respondents reported a decrease in level of direct supervision. Despite these changes, the majority of trainee respondents (78%) felt well prepared for clinical practice after graduation. Conclusions These results outline the vulnerable position of internal medicine physicians in training. Preserving edu‐ cational experiences, adequate supervision, and humane work hours are essential in protecting trainees from mental illness and burnout during global emergencies. conclusion This national survey among IM trainees in the U.S. highlights important issues that affected residents and fellows during the COVID-19 pandemic. Specific areas of
concern include decreased protected educational time, decreased direct supervision at some institutions, an alarmingly high level of burnout among trainees, and increased systemic racism during the pandemic.