Articular cartilage injuries are inherently irreversible, even with the advancement in current therapeutic options. Alternative approaches, such as the use of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) and tissue engineering techniques, have gained prominence. MSCs represent an ideal source of cells due to their low immunogenicity, paracrine activity, and ability to differentiate. Among biomaterials, self-assembling peptide hydrogels (SAPH) are interesting given their characteristics such as good biocompatibility and tunable properties. Herein we associate human adipose-derived stem cells (hASCs) with a commercial SAPH, PuramatrixTM, to evaluate how this three-dimensional microenvironment affects cell behavior and its ability to undergo chondrogenic differentiation. We demonstrate that the PuramatrixTM hydrogel comprises a highly porous matrix permissible for hASC adhesion and in vitro expansion. The morphology and cell growth dynamics of hASCs were affected when cultured on the hydrogel but had minimal alteration in their immunophenotype. Interestingly, hASCs spontaneously formed cell aggregates throughout culturing. Analysis of glycosaminoglycan production and gene expression revealed a noteworthy and donor-dependent trend suggesting that PuramatrixTM hydrogel may have a natural capacity to support the chondrogenic differentiation of hASCs. Altogether, the results provide a more comprehensive understanding of the potential applications and limitations of the PuramatrixTM hydrogel in developing functional cartilage tis- 1. conclusions In this study, we were able to better understand how the SAPH Puramatrix™ influences hASCs. We noticed that PURA stimulated a considerable increase in the expression of chondrogenic genes and the production of GAGs that were more evident in some individual hASC biological replicates. In addition, an interesting and unexpected fact observed was the spontaneous formation of cellular aggregates in the Puramatrix™, one of the initial stages of chondrogenesis. Considering the induced shift in cell behavior and the observation of initial chondrogenesis induction, we postulated that Puramatrix™ can be used as a biomaterial for application in cartilage regeneration, although more studies are needed to confirm this.