The global spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) has had a devastating impact on thousands of small businesses. Many businesspeople, especially those who own and run micro-businesses, have been hampered by the unprecedented scale of the lockdown of social activities and the restrictions placed on their freedom of movement. The reciprocity process between small rural businesses and residents is ultimately in the interest of improving agrotourism performance. Integrating the nonzero-sum games theory and the social exchange theory, this study aims to achieve the following: (1) testing the relationship between family micro-businesses resources and agritourism performance; (2) examining the impact of two mediating variables (resident–micro-business interaction and support for agritourism development); and (3) testing the intervention of one moderating variable (personal resident benefit) on the tested relationships. Dyads data was collected from 293 residents/family small businesses operators. Partial least squares-based structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) with the SmartPLS program was employed to analyze the collected data. Family micro-business resources were found to have a positive and significant impact on agritourism performance, moreover, resident–micro-business interaction and support for agritourism development were found to partially mediate the relationship between family micro-business resources and agritourism performance, and the personal resident benefit significantly moderated the relationship between family microbusiness resources and resident–micro-business interaction. Several implications for academics and policymakers were elaborated. The limitations and further study opportunities were also discussed. 1. conclusions and avenues for further research Rural local hosts may resist rural tourism development if they believe they are responsible for most of the key attractions but have the least access to those helpful to tourists. Dyadic data were gathered targeting 400 residents—owners and employees in family microbusinesses. A total of 293 valid responses were prepared for further analysis with PLS-SEM. After ensuring that the study scale possesses adequate convergent and discriminant validity, the proposed hypotheses were tested. The results supported the direct association
Mathematics 2023, 11, 359 13 of 15
between family micro-business resources (small business orientation, social capital, and social network ties) and agritourism performance. Additionally, the results highlighted the critical mediating roles of resident–micro-business interaction and support for agritourism development in improving the tested direct relationships. Furthermore, the PLS-SEM result supported the moderating role of personal resident benefit in strengthening the tested interrelationships. These results are consistent with different previous study results, but the main contribution of our study is that it tested all of these relationships (direct, mediating, and moderating), for the first time, in one model employing a sophisticated data analysis technique (PLS-SEM), in one context (family micro-businesses in KSA), post COVID-19 pandemic.