Biochar has been widely reported to improve soil conditions and affect plant growth. However, its effectiveness is limited by soil type and production technology. Considering the application effect of biochar in saline alkali soil, there is currently a lack of in-depth mechanism explanations in the research. Therefore, we designed an experiment to explore the effect of biochar on plant growth in saline alkali soil and conducted soil column experiments in a greenhouse environment using composite inorganic fertilizer (NPK). The results showed that biochar significantly affected the distribution of soil nutrient content at different depths, with a significant increase in fertility levels in the surface and middle layers and a decrease in fertility levels in deep soils. Compared to using fertilizers alone, the combined use of biochar and fertilizers further expands the enrichment effect and significantly reduces the leaching of fertilizers into deeper layers. At the same time, the application of biochar also improved soil properties, including an increase in electrical conductivity and organic matter content, as well as an increase in soil enzyme activity. On the other hand, the application of biochar also increases the activity of antioxidant enzymes and the content of osmoregulation substances in plants, reducing the environmental stress that plants are subjected to. Therefore, our results indicate that biochar can reduce the leaching of fertilizers into deep soil layers, improve soil properties, and promotes the growth of Miscanthus in saline alkali soils. 1. conclusions In response to reports of biochar adsorption on fertilizer, we designed and conducted a targeted soil column experiment to investigate the effects of biochar with different depths of application on soil properties. Our results show that the use of biochar can indeed enhance the retention effect of nutrients in the soil. In particular, compared to individual fertilization, the combined use of biochar and fertilizer significantly reduces the leaching of fertilizer into the deep layer and enhances its retention in the middle layer of the soil. This indicates that applying biochar in the middle layer also has a good fertilizer adsorption effect. Furthermore, biochar positively influenced key physical and chemical properties of the soil, including enhancement of the activity of alkaline phosphatase and other enzymes. The interactions also promoted the growth of plant roots, thus increasing plant resistance to saline alkali stress and ultimately resulting in a higher growth of miscanthus in saline alkali soil.