Three colour and depth (RGB-D) devices were compared, to assess the effect of depth image misalignment, resulting from simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) error, due to forest structure complexity. Urban parkland (S1) was used to assess stem density, and understory vegetation (≤1.3 m) was assessed in native woodland (S2). Individual stem and continuous capture approaches were used, with stem diameter at breast height (DBH) estimated. Misalignment was present within point clouds; however, no significant differences in DBH were observed for stems captured at S1 with either approach (Kinect p = 0.16; iPad p = 0.27; Zed p = 0.79). Using continuous capture, the iPad was the only RGB-D device to maintain SLAM in all S2 plots. There was significant correlation between DBH error and surrounding understory vegetation with the Kinect device (p = 0.04). Conversely, there was no significant relationship between DBH error and understory vegetation for the iPad (p = 0.55) and Zed (p = 0.86). The iPad had the lowest DBH root-mean-square error (RMSE) across both individual stem (RMSE = 2.16 cm) and continuous (RMSE = 3.23 cm) capture approaches. The results suggest that the assessed RGB-D devices are more capable of operation within complex forest environments than previous generations. 1. conclusions The results of this paper, suggest that the selection of current RGB-D devices assessed are more capable of operating within structurally complex forest environments, when compared to their predecessors. Whilst misalignment error due to incidental captures was visible in point cloud representations of stems, it was not observed to have a significant effect on DBH measurements derived with these devices. Individual captures of stems, as opposed to a continuous plot-scale capture, resulted in lower DBH RMSE. Furthermore, the complexity of the native woodland plots also resulted in complete loss of spatial positional estimates within the SLAM algorithms associated with the Kinect and Zed devices. This resulted in point cloud representations of forest structure no longer being reconstructed beyond this point. However, beyond one occurrence of self-occlusion with the Kinect sensor, it is difficult to determine the exact cause for this. Of the sensors assessed, the iPad achieved the lowest DBH RMSE across both parkland and native woodland environments, and using both capture approaches. It also provided the best user experience, being integrated into a tablet, providing near real-time feedback of registration.