Prostate cancer is being detected in increasingly younger men. These patients expect to preserve their current quality of life and quickly recover after treatment. Medical technology and surgical techniques are advancing along with the growing expectations of patients. In addition, the universal method of assessing the quality of outcomes after operations is constantly being researched. As of today, biochemical remission alone, after radical prostatectomy, is insufficient for the patient. Therefore, multi-parametric evaluation methods are being developed, such as trifecta, which assesses biochemical remission, continence, and erectile function. The improvement over the trifecta is the pentafecta, which additionally evaluates postoperative complications and infiltration of surgical margins. Our study was conducted within a group of patients who were surgically treated for prostate cancer in 2017 at the Clinic of Urology and Urological Oncology of the Pomeranian Medical University. We recruited 237 men for the study. From that group, 131 men met the criteria to be included in the analysis. Maintaining continence (87.78%) is the easiest pentafecta parameter to obtain and will have the greatest impact on quality of life in the future. Maintaining biochemical remission (82.44%) is the second most important aspect for the patient. Retaining erectile function is the most difficult pentafecta parameter to obtain (29.01%) while having little impact on the quality of life. Negative surgical margins (66.41%) showed a negligible impact on the quality of life. The occurrence of complications (32.07%) has a negative impact on the quality of life of patients, but only during the treatment of complications. 1. conclusions Preservation of continence (87.78%) is the easiest to obtain parameter of pentafecta and, at the same time, has the greatest impact on the quality of life in the long term. Maintaining biochemical remission (82.44%) is the second-most important parameter. Maintaining sexual performance is the most difficult pentafecta parameter to obtain (29.01%), at the same time having little impact on the quality of life. Negative surgical margins (66.41%) show little effect on the quality of life. The occurrence of complications (32.07%) has a negative impact on the patient’s quality of life. The impact of treatment on quality of life is becoming an increasingly important factor when choosing a method. The dynamic development of minimally invasive techniques as well as non-surgical treatment techniques such as radiotherapy is aimed at a quick recovery for patients.
