Leptospirosis is one of the most widespread zoonotic diseases and can infect both humans and animals worldwide. The role of the cat as a susceptible host and potential environmental reservoir of Leptospira is still not well understood, due to the lack of obvious clinical signs associated with Leptospira spp. infection in this species. This study aims to describe the first European detection of Leptospira interrogans serogroup Australis ST 24 in a young outdoor cat with a severe comorbidity (feline panleukopenia virus). In addition, the results of a preliminary study conducted in 2014–2016 are presented (RC IZSVE 16/12), which reports an investigation of Leptospira exposure of outdoor cats in Northeast Italy by means of serological investigation and molecular evaluation of urine. The animals included in the survey are part of samples collected during active and passive surveillance (diagnostic samples). The study reported a seroprevalence of 10.5% among outdoor cats and the serogroups identified were Grippotyphosa, Icterohaemorrhagiae, Bratislava, Canicola and Ballum. Symptomatic cats reported high MAT titres (ranging from 1:800 to 1:1600) towards antigens belonging to the serovars Grippotyphosa (1:800), Bratislava (1:1600), Icterohaemorrhagiae (1:200) and Copenhageni (1:200–1:800). In one subject, urine tested positive for Leptospira PCR. Cats with high antibody titres for Leptospira and/or positivity on molecular test suffered from immunosuppressive comorbidities (feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukaemia virus; feline herpesvirus and lymphoma; hyperthyroidism). The overall prevalence of serum antibodies against Leptospira found in free-ranging cats (10.53%, 95% CI: 4.35–16.70%) and the identification of L. interrogans ST 24 in a young cat with immunosuppressive disease (feline panleukopenia virus) suggest the possibility of natural resistance to clinical leptospirosis in healthy cats. In a One Health perspective, further studies are needed to better define the pathogenesis of leptospirosis in cats and their epidemiological role as environmental sentinels or possible carriers of pathogenic Leptospira. 1. conclusions The detection of new ST in cats highlights the need to consider the challenge of better understanding the effect of exposure to or infection with pathogenic Leptospira spp. in felines, and the need to define their epidemiological role as sentinel hosts or environmental reservoirs. Outdoor and shelter cats that are free-roaming and hunt prey would be a population worthy of special attention: although they may not explicitly manifest symptoms of leptospirosis, they may instead reveal circulating strains of Leptospira in a domestic–shelter (cat–prey) or domestic–domestic (cat–dog or other susceptible domestic mammals) context. In addition, as highlighted by the
serological survey in outdoor cats, further studies are needed to increase knowledge about the host-immune response following infection or exposure to specific Leptospira serovars within the feline population