The peste des petits ruminant (PPR) virus is a transboundary virus found in small domestic ruminants that causes high morbidity and mortality in naive herds. PPR can be effectively controlled and eradicated by vaccinating small domestic ruminants with a live-attenuated peste des petits ruminant virus (PPRV) vaccine, which provides long-lasting immunity. We studied the potency and safety of a live-attenuated vaccine in goats by detecting their cellular and humoral immune responses. Six goats were subcutaneously vaccinated with a live-attenuated PPRV vaccine according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and two goats were kept in contact. Following vaccination, the goats were monitored daily, and we recorded their body temperature and clinical score. Heparinized blood and serum were collected for a serological analysis, and swab samples and EDTA blood were collected to detect the PPRV genome. The safety of the used PPRV vaccine was confirmed by the absence of PPR-related clinical signs, a negative pen-side test, a low virus genome load as detected with RT-qPCR on the vaccinated goats, and the lack horizontal transmission between the in-contact goats. The strong humoral and cellular immune responses detected in the vaccinated goats showed that the live-attenuated PPRV vaccine has a strong potency in goats. Therefore, live-attenuated vaccines against PPR can be used to control and eradicate PRR. 1. conclusions Our findings confirmed that the commercially available live-attenuated PPRV vaccine strain Nigeria 75/1 is potent and safe for the vaccination of “Deutsche Edelziege” goats. Negative pen-side test results, the detection of a low virus-genome load in sample materials from vaccinated goats according to RT-qPCR, the early immune response including seroconversion, and a lack of transmission to the in-contact goats confirmed that the excreted vaccine virus was not infectious and that horizontal transmission was not possible. Based on the data obtained, the long-term protection of the vaccination against PPRV field infections probably varies across individual animals. Since the immune response that has the greatest impact on vaccine efficacy is still unclear, a strong humoral immune response has been associated with the duration and extent of vaccine virus replication in the animal in general or in specific tissues. The strong cellular and humoral immune responses observed in a certain number of vaccinated animals can potentially be important to ensuring long-lasting protection. Altogether, we confirmed that the used commercially available liveattenuated PPR vaccine can be used to control and eradicate PPR in “Deutsche Edelziege” goats.