Exopolysaccharides (EPSs) produced by lactic acid bacteria present a particular interest for the food industry since they can be incorporated in foods via in situ production by selected starter cultures or applied as natural additives to improve the quality of various food products. In the present study, 43 strains were isolated from different plant-based fermented foods and identified by molecular methods. The species found were distinctively specific according to the food source. Only six Lactiplantibacillus plantarum strains, all isolated from sauerkraut, showed the ability to produce exopolysaccharide (EPS). The utilization of glucose, fructose and sucrose was explored with regard to EPS and biomass accumulation by the tested strains. Sucrose was clearly the best carbon source for EPS production by most of the strains, yielding up to 211.53 mg/L by strain Lactiplantibacillus plantarum ZE2, while biomass accumulation reached the highest levels in the glucose-based culture medium. Most strains produced similar levels of EPS with glucose and fructose, while fructose was utilized more poorly for biomass production, yielding about 50% of biomass compared to glucose for most strains. Composition analysis of the EPSs produced by strain Lactiplantibacillus plantarum ZE2 from glucose (EPS-1) and fructose (EPS-2) revealed that glucose (80–83 mol%) and protein (41% w/w) predominated in both analyzed EPSs. However, the yield of EPS-1 was twice higher than that of EPS-2, and differences in the levels of all detected sugars were found, which shows that even for the same strain, EPS yield and composition vary depending on the carbon source. These results may be the basis for the development of tailored EPS-producing starter cultures for food fermentations, as well as technologies for the production of EPS for vari- 1. conclusions The present study was related to the high research interest on the selection of EPSproducing lactic acid bacteria in view of their potential applications in the food and pharmaceutical industry. Forty-three strains were isolated from different plant-based fermented foods (5 cereal-based beverages and 1 sauerkraut product) and identified through molecular methods. The species found were Pediococcus acidilactici, Limosilactobacillus fermentum, Pediococcus pentosaceus, Enterococcus faecium, Lactiplantibacillus plantarum and Levilactobacillus brevis, with a distinctive specificity of distribution according to the food source. Six Lactiplantibacillus plantarum strains isolated from sauerkraut showed the ability to produce exopolysaccharides. The effect of the carbon source on EPS and biomass accumulation by the tested strains was further explored by using glucose, fructose and sucrose. In general, sucrose was the best carbon source for EPS production by most of the strains, yielding up to 211.53 mg/L by strain ZE2, while biomass accumulation reached the highest levels in the glucose-based culture medium. Strain ZS4 was an exception, yielding the highest optical density of 6.27 with sucrose. Most strains produced similar levels of EPS with glucose and fructose, with differences of about 10%. In contrast, fructose was utilized more poorly for biomass production, yielding almost 50% of biomass compared to glucose for most strains. The results from these experiments demonstrate that the effect of the carbon source on EPS production is different from that on biomass accumulation by each strain. Therefore, strain specificity and the aim of cultivation (biomass or EPS production) must be taken into account when choosing the carbon source. The effect of glucose and fructose on the EPS composition was also tested by cultivating strain Lactiplantibacillus plantarum ZE2. The yield of EPS-1 (glucose medium) was twice higher than that of EPS-2 (fructose medium), and differences in the levels of all detected sugars were found, which demonstrates that even for the same strain, EPS yield and composition vary depending on the carbon source. Glucose (80–83 mol%) and protein (41% w/w) were still predominant in both produced EPSs. These implications stress
the importance of also exploring the mechanisms leading to EPS production by lactic acid bacteria in different food matrices