Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) cemiplimab and pembrolizumab have revolutionized the treatment of advanced cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC). We aimed to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of ICI in a real-world cSCC population, including patients with conditions that would exclude clinical trial participation. In this single-center, retrospective cohort study, we included all non-trial patients with advanced cSCC treated with ICI between 2017 and 2022. We evaluated investigator-assessed best overall response (BOR) and immune-related adverse events (irAEs). We correlated survival outcomes with age, performance status, immune status and irAEs. Of the 36 patients identified, the best overall response (BOR) to ICI was a partial response (PR) in 41.7%, a complete response (CR) in 27.8%, and stable disease in (SD) 13.9%. The progression-free survival (PFS) rate for 1 year was 58.1%; the median PFS was 21.3 months (95% CI 6.4–NE). The 1-year overall survival (OS) was 76.7%, and the median OS was 38.6 months (95% CI 25.4–NE). Immunecompromised patients, ECOG performance 2–3, and age ≥ 75 years were not significantly associated with PFS or OS. IrAE grades 3–4 were seen in 13.9% of patients. In our Canadian experience with real-world patients, ICI was an effective and safe treatment for advanced cSCC patients. Patients achieved great benefits with ICI regardless of age, immune status or ECOG performance status. Cancers 2023, 15, 4312. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15174312 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers Cancers 2023, 15, 4312 2 of 18 We acknowledge the small sample size and retrospective methodology as the main limitations of our study. 1. conclusions on their risk of flare-up of their autoimmune condition. Data from retrospective studies suggest that between 20 and 40% of patients experienced exacerbation of their autoimmune disease with ICI [58–62], which were manageable. A metanalysis of 12 studies including 193 patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) treated with ICI, reported a 40% relapse of their IBD, with a third of them requiring biologic therapy [63]. As for patients with pre-existing autoimmune rheumatologic disease, patients with rheumatoid arthritis have a higher risk of flares, of about 45%, compared to those with other rheumatologic disorders [64,65]. Our safety data is similar to findings of phase I and II clinical trials with cemiplimab, pembrolizumab and nivolumab, which report grade 3 or higher treatment-related adverse events between 7 and 25% [25,27,29,31–33], with patients discontinuing ICI due to toxicity between 4 and 7% [25,27,31–33]. Despite the infrequent incidence of grade 3 or higher irAE, it is of critical significance given that advanced cSCC primarily occurs in geriatric or immunocompromised patients, where the benefits and risks of any systemic therapy necessitate careful individualized consideration. We would also like to point out that despite our aging cohort, with 47.2% of patients being older than 70 years old and 13.9% more than 90, ICIs were well tolerated. This is particularly important to note, as other forms of systemic therapy like chemotherapy may lead to increased toxicity in the elderly population. These safety results should be interpreted with caution given the retrospective nature of this study. It is important to note that the recording of adverse events in the medical chart may not have been exhaustive, which could have an impact on the accuracy of the findings. Multiple retrospective and prospective studies [66–74] have suggested an association between irAE and the effectiveness of ICIs, in terms of response and survival outcomes. In our cohort, we found an improved PFS in patients who presented with an irAE grade 1 or 2, but not for those who presented an irAE grade 3 or more. For patients with grade 1 or 2 irAE, there was a trend toward better OS, but it did not meet statistical significance. Since its approval by the FDA in 2018 and 2020 for cemiplimab and pembrolizumab, respectively, both anti-PD-1 inhibitors have become preferred systemic treatment options for patients with unresectable, recurrent or metastatic cSCC according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network Guidelines (version 1.2023). Surgery remains the corner-
Cancers 2023, 15, 4312 13 of 18
stone of treatment as the primary curative option for resectable patients. The therapeutic activity of neoadjuvant cemiplimab was demonstrated in a phase II non-randomized trial, which showed a 51% pathological complete response [75]. More recently, the results of the MATISSE trial were presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology annual meeting in June 2023, which demonstrated deep responses with two infusions of neoadjuvant nivolumab alone (50%) or in combination with ipilimumab (61%) [76]. These results are encouraging, although a longer follow-up is needed to demonstrate if this finding translates into a longer disease-free survival, as it has in patients with melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer [77–79]. The next step will be to elucidate the role of anti-PD-1 in the adjuvant setting; two phase III clinical trials assessing adjuvant cemiplimab (NCT03969004) and adjuvant pembrolizumab (NCT03833167) following surgery and RT in locally advanced cSCC patients are currently ongoing. Finally, how to overcome primary and secondary resistance to ICI are active areas of research for many different cancer types. There are not many systemic options for patients with cSCC who progress to ICI. A phase II nonrandomized trial aiming to revert the resistance to pembrolizumab in patients with locally advanced or metastatic cSCC patients that presented SD or PD, administered cetuximab in addition to pembrolizumab until progression [80]. This study reported a response rate of 44% with the combination strategy, although grade 3–4 treatment-related adverse events occurred in 35% of patients [80]. The two patients in this study that presented acquired resistance to pembrolizumab, presented PR when introducing cetuximab [80]. In our cohort, two patients received cetuximab after progression to cemiplimab. One of them had primary resistance to cemiplimab (receiving only three cycles) and had a PR to cetuximab. The second patient had PR to cemiplimab (receiving 12 cycles) and presented a CR to cetuximab. Both patients, however, progressed to cetuximab in less than a year. A therapeutic strategy to increase the response rate of ICI and to overcome mechanisms of resistance to progression is the addition of an anti-EGFR agent. The hypothesis that the adjunct of an anti-EGFR agent could reverse the primary and secondary resistance to ICI in advanced cSCC is currently being assessed in two phase II trials: avelumab in combination with cetuximab (NCT03944941) and pembrolizumab in combination with cetuximab (NCT03666325). There are several ongoing trials exploring mechanisms to overcome resistance and improve outcomes to ICI in patients with advanced cSCC: nivolumab in combination with talimogene lapherparepvec (NCT02978625), nivolumab in combination with relatlimab (NCT04204837), pembrolizumab in combination with the C5a Antibody IFX-1 (NCT04812535), atezolizumab (anti-PD-L1) in combination with NT-I7 (recombinant IL-7-hybrid Fc, which acts through IL-7 receptor to promote proliferation, maintenance, and functionality of T-cell subsets), and intratumoral cavrotolimod (a toll-like receptor 9 agonist that activates plasmacytoid dendritic cells and triggers interferon alpha release) injections in combination with intravenous pembrolizumab or cemiplimab (NCT03684785). The results of these studies will hopefully inform further treatment approaches for patients with advanced cSCC refractory to monotherapy with an anti-PD1 ICI. We acknowledge several limitations of our study. The small sample size, lack of comparator arm and retrospective methodology of our study may limit its ability to detect significant outcomes. Another limitation is the investigator-assessed response without a validation process, which undermines its reproducibility. Nevertheless, we also recognize the lack of clinical data on older patients or with immune suppressive conditions, which are precisely the patients with the diagnosis of advanced cSCC that we encounter in real-world scenarios. We hope to provide additional data about PD-1 inhibition from a real-world cohort of advanced cSCC patients to help clinicians in decision-making, especially for patients not represented in clinical trials. 5. conclusions The treatment of locally advanced metastatic cSCC remains a challenge, and discussion at multidisciplinary tumor boards is strongly advised. Chemotherapy and targeted agents against EGFR may achieve response in about one-third of the patients; however, these
Cancers 2023, 15, 4312 14 of 18
responses are not sustained, and the adverse events are often not compatible with the frailty of these patients [18–23]. ICI exhibits a high response rate, prolonged duration of response, and a favorable toxicity profile; these characteristics position them as a preferred therapeutic option, particularly suitable for elderly patients with comorbidities that might otherwise preclude the utilization of conventional systemic treatments. Our single-center institutional experience with anti-PD-1 in locally advanced or metastatic cSCC patients demonstrated its effectiveness and safety in the real-world setting, regardless of age or ECOG performance status. More important, our data suggest that patients with immunosuppressive conditions, such as active autoimmune diseases, hematological malignancies and solid organ transplant recipients, also benefit from this treatment. This is the first study to report outcomes of ICI in patients with advanced cSCC in Canada, and our findings support its use as first-line treatment.