The autonomic nervous system (ANS) may play a role in the distribution of body fat and the development of obesity and its complications. Features of individuals with Prader–Willi syndrome (PWS) impacted by PWS molecular genetic classes suggest alterations in ANS function; however, these have been rarely studied and presented with conflicting results. The aim of this study was to investigate if the ANS function is altered in PWS. In this case-control study, we assessed ANS function in 20 subjects with PWS (6 males/14 females; median age 10.5 years) and 27 body mass index (BMI) z-score-matched controls (19 males/8 females; median age 12.8 years). Standardized non-invasive measures of cardiac baroreflex function, heart rate, blood pressure, heart rate variability, quantitative sudomotor axon reflex tests, and a symptom questionnaire were completed. The increase in heart rate in response to head-up tilt testing was blunted (p < 0.01) in PWS compared to controls. Besides a lower heart rate ratio with Valsalva in PWS (p < 0.01), no significant differences were observed in other measures of cardiac function or sweat production. Findings suggest possible altered sympathetic 1. At least two attempts were made with a rest interval of 5 min in between. The average heart rate difference between inspiration and expiration for the best HRDB response was included in the analysis, and the time taken for 5 breaths was recorded. The Valsalva maneuver involved maintaining an expiratory pressure of 40 mm Hg for 15 s, blowing into a mouthpiece with high expiratory outflow resistance to increase intrathoracic pressure transiently [71]. The maximum heart rate during Valsalva and lower heart rate within 30 s after Vasalva was recorded as the heart ratio. The greatest heart rate ratio was included in the analysis from two Valsalva attempts conducted with a 5 min rest interval in between. In addition, heart rate variability at rest and in response to HUT was assessed using time domain and frequency domain analysis [78]. For frequency domain analysis, the power density spectrum was integrated, and power spectra within the 0.04–0.15 Hz range were defined as LF components, whereas those at 0.15–0.4 Hz frequency were defined as HF components. Autoregressive spectral analysis was used to derive the frequency domain
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 8013 12 of 16
measures in high (HF), low (LF), and very low frequencies (VLF). The LF/HF power ratio was also determined as an indirect measure of sympathovagal balance [78]. QSART [79] was used to quantify postganglionic sweat output resulting from axon reflex stimulation using acetylcholine iontophoresis. The QSART device (Q-Sweat, WR Medical Inc., Stillwater, MN, USA) was used to measure sweat output, indicative of the sudomotor response at the foot, distal leg, proximal leg, and ipsilateral forearm. 4.5. statistical analysis The a priori statistical analysis was performed on all available data. Considerable efforts were made to obtain high quality data from each participant, but the autonomic testing maneuvers described above were performed with variable degrees of adherence. As a quality and sensitivity analysis, a per protocol analysis was also performed where data from procedures with inadequate adherence to the protocol were excluded. Normally distributed continuous variables were represented as mean ± standard deviation (SD); group differences in these variables were compared by Student’s t-test. Other continuous variables were represented as medians and 25th and 75th percentiles of the interquartile ranges; group differences in these variables were compared by Wilcoxon’s rank test. Categorical variables were described as frequencies and percentages, with the between-group difference tested by means of the chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test when the number of events was less than 5. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software (version 20.0; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) was used to analyze all data. R (version 4.2.2) [80], R-Studio (2022.12.0.353) [81], and tidyverse package [82] were used for the analysis of autonomic outcome measures, and the gtsummary package [83] was used for the formatting of reporting tables. 5. conclusions In summary, the increase of heart rate in response to HUT was reduced in children with PWS compared to controls, suggesting possible altered sympathetic function in PWS which is supported by the self- and parent-reported frequency of signs and symptoms associated with peripheral autonomic dysfunction compared to controls. There were no significant differences detected between groups for the other measures of parasympathetically mediated autonomic control, including Valsalva and HRDB. Our findings are supported by both studies in PWS mouse models and clinical trials of individuals with PWS.