Afatinib, the world’s first irreversible ErbB family (containing four different cancer cell epidermal growth factor receptors, including EGFR, HER2, ErbB3, and ErbB4) inhibitor, is a secondgeneration oral epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI). It can be used as a first-line treatment for locally advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with an EGFR-sensitive mutation or for patients with locally advanced or metastatic squamous lung cancer whose disease progresses during or after platinum-containing chemotherapy. Currently, with the use of third-generation EGFR-TKIs, afatinib is no longer clinically indicated as the first choice for patients with NSCLC who have EGFR-sensitive mutations. However, afatinib showed a considerable inhibitory effect in NSCLC patients with uncommon EGFR mutations (G719X, S768I, and L861Q) according to a combined post hoc analysis of the LUX-Lung2/3/6 trials. With the development of genetic testing technology, the detection rate of uncommon EGFR mutations is increasing. The aim of this paper is to describe in detail the sensitivity of rare EGFR mutations to afatinib and to provide information and a reference for those suffering from advanced NSCLC who have uncommon 1. conclusions Some of the rare oncogene-dependent NSCLC subgroups, such as RET (rearrangement during transfection) or ROS1 (c-ros oncogene 1) rearrangements, or BRAF (v-Raf mouse sarcoma virus oncogene homolog B) mutations, share a frequency range with rare EGFR mutations, such as exon 18 G719X or exon 20 S768I [2]. We ought to discover more about
these mutations and be capable of figuring out the corresponding treatment options for these mutations. Afatinib’s use has decreased dramatically in recent years because of the creation of third-generation EGFR-TKIs, although it is still essential for the treatment of uncommon EGFR mutations. The results in this article support the notion that afatinib has an overall advantage over first-generation EGFR-TKIs in the treatment of rare EGFR mutations and is adequate as a first-line treatment preference for NSCLC patients with major uncommon and compound mutation categories among rare EGFR mutations. It is a viable alternative for those patients following later-line therapy because afatinib is also efficacious for G724S or L718Q/V mutations that appear after osimertinib resistance. In addition, afatinib is also effective for patients carrying E709X and E709_T710delinsX mutations, some of the 20 exon insertional mutations, and some of the rare EGFR exon 19 mutations, and it is the preferred first-line therapy among individuals in this category. There are other patients with rare mutations who do not respond to afatinib and first-generation EGFR-TKIs. These rare EGFR mutations (e.g., 20 insertional mutations, 19 rare mutations) are highly heterogeneous and require further clarification of the patient-specific mutation subtype to select the appropriate therapy. The EGFR T790M mutation is considered to be the main mechanism of acquired resistance to afatinib in patients with classical EGFR mutations [42,60], but the cause of resistance in individuals with uncommon EGFR mutations remains unclear. According to one study, patients with uncommon EGFR mutations are more likely to have MET amplification than T790M mutation after afatinib resistance. In patients with uncommon mutations, the incidence of acquired EGFR T790M mutations was significantly lower than that of 19del and L858R mutations [61]. Another study with a small sample size suggests that EGFR T790M (11%) and FGFR1 amplification (11%), and MET amplification (11%), followed by CDK4 amplification (7%), PI3KCA activation (7%), RET fusion (4%), and BRAF mutation (4%) may be the main mechanisms of resistance in EGFR G719X/L861Q/S768I patients treated with afatinib [62]. Another cohort study from China investigated the mechanisms of resistance to afatinib in NSCLC patients with rare EGFR mutations. The results showed that 11.8% of patients had acquired EGFR T790M mutations, and the top three off-target mutations were TP53 (58.8%), LRP1B (17.6%), and CHD8 (17.6%). Consistent with other studies, this study also demonstrated that the rate of secondary T790M mutation in patients with rare EGFR mutations was significantly lower than that in patients with classical EGFR mutations. Intracranial progression occurred in 50% of patients treated with afatinib in this study, and subsequent treatment of progressive patients was mostly combined with antiangiogenic drugs and/or brain radiotherapy on top of afatinib [63]. This article’s content, which concentrates more on the medicine afatinib, has certain restrictions. In addition, chemotherapy, third-generation targeted drugs, and immunologic drugs have also been the subject of some clinical studies for the treatment of uncommon EGFR mutations. Osimertinib, a third-generation medication, has already been shown to be beneficial for treating uncommon EGFR mutations in several studies [64,65]. For patients with a single uncommon EGFR mutation, there are studies that point to first-line chemotherapy having a better OS than EGFR-TKIs (which include the first-generation of EGFR-TKIs and afatinib) [66]. Another study from China showed that in first-line treatment of patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma with uncommon EGFR mutations, the PFS was better with first-generation EGFR-TKIs than with platinum-based chemotherapy, but the OS was inferior to chemotherapy [67]. Another study has shown that immunotherapy may be an effective treatment for patients with rare EGFR mutations in NSCLC [68]. In summary, there are no standard treatment options for patients with rare EGFR mutations,
and further studies are needed to help determine treatment options for patients with NSCLC with uncommon EGFR mutations.