Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is closely related to neurodegeneration, leading to dementia and cognitive impairment, especially in people aged > 65 years old. The detection of biomarkers plays a pivotal role in the diagnosis and treatment of AD, particularly at the onset stage. Field-effect transistor (FET)-based sensors are emerging devices that have drawn considerable attention due to their crucial ability to recognize various biomarkers at ultra-low concentrations. Thus, FET is broadly manipulated for AD biomarker detection. In this review, an overview of typical FET features and their operational mechanisms is described in detail. In addition, a summary of AD biomarker detection and the applicability of FET biosensors in this research field are outlined and discussed. Furthermore, the trends and future prospects of FET devices in AD diagnostic applications are also discussed. 1. conclusions and future vision FET biosensors are ready to proceed down the path of commercialization if several factors are achieved, such as sensitivity, selectivity, reproducibility, scalability, low-cost production, and continuous signal monitoring. Previous publications have revealed that FET biosensors are sensitive enough (at femto- or picomolar concentration) to detect AD biomarkers. However, even with the same fabricated condition, there is still device-todevice variation due to the difficult controllability of defects and the grain boundary of the advanced material-based sensing channel. Thus, during the sensor fabrication process, the defects and grain boundary should be considered in a microscopic regime, and a multi-sensor system study should be conducted at a macroscopic level to surpass these drawbacks. Moreover, well-controlled sensing materials also conserve low and stable background signals to achieve high and precise sensitivity. Furthermore, the integration of FET biosensors into an Internet of Things (IoT) device requires proper and secure information during signal modulation. Overall, solving these remaining issues makes the fabricated sensors more precise and reliable for commercialization. Like their other biosensor counterparts, FET biosensors are crucial in diagnosing and providing early warning for recognizing and treating AD. This study showed that an FET biosensor with a reasonable design based on advanced materials and cutting-edge technology proved capable of detecting AD biomarkers at the pico- or femtomolar LOD. However, certain necessary improvements to meet these requirements should be considered to obtain high selectivity and sensitivity. (1) A screening procedure for electrode fabrication should be considered to design an FET biosensor for AD biomarker detection. (2) To detect a specific AD biomarker, the selection of the bioreceptor is crucial. (3) A combination of multiple approaches is necessary to achieve optimum performance. (4) The prediction of new circumstances by application of machine learning and deep learning should be conducted. Via technological development, the application of machine learning in biomedicine is of interest through collecting big data, training a model, and inferring a new circumstance by the manipulation of artificial intelligence (AI) power [120]. Biosensors 2023, 13, 987 14 of 18