Diversity of phage propagation, physical properties, and assembly promotes the use of phages in ecological studies and biomedicine. However, observed phage diversity is incomplete. Bacillus thuringiensis siphophage, 0105phi-7-2, first described here, significantly expands known phage diversity, as seen via in-plaque propagation, electron microscopy, whole genome sequencing/annotation, protein mass spectrometry, and native gel electrophoresis (AGE). Average plaque diameter vs. plaque-supporting agarose gel concentration plots reveal unusually steep conversion to large plaques as agarose concentration decreases below 0.2%. These large plaques sometimes have small satellites and are made larger by orthovanadate, an ATPase inhibitor. Phage head–host-cell binding is observed by electron microscopy. We hypothesize that this binding causes plaque size-increase via biofilm evolved, ATP stimulated ride-hitching on motile host cells by temporarily inactive phages. Phage 0105phi7-2 does not propagate in liquid culture. Genomic sequencing/annotation reveals history as temperate phage and distant similarity, in a virion-assembly gene cluster, to prototypical siphophage SPP1 of Bacillus subtilis. Phage 0105phi7-2 is distinct in (1) absence of head-assembly scaffolding via either separate protein or classically sized, head protein-embedded peptide, (2) producing partially condensed, head-expelled DNA, and (3) having a surface relatively poor in AGE-detected net negative charges, which is possibly correlated with observed low murine blood persistence. 1. conclusion was confirmed
by staining of these particles with the protein-specific stain, Coomassie blue (not shown). Additional, possibly phage-related particles were revealed by the fluorescence inten-
sity increase in Figure 6d. Some of these particles formed a band labeled 1 (top right) in
Figure 6d. Band 1 was formed by cathode-migrating particles, indicating a net positive σ. The band 1-particles almost co-sedimented with the negative-σ phages in the sucrose gra-
dient, supporting the designation of both as phages. Slightly more rapid sedimentation
for the band 1 particles is discernible via fraction number-dependence of band 1 intensity. That is to say, phage 0105phi7-2 had at least two electrophoretically distinguishable, al-
ternately charged states. This aspect has apparently not been found among other double-
stranded DNA phages. In summary, as predicted above, the low persistence of phage
0105phi-7-2 was accompanied by σ that was either positive or low-magnitude negative. More extensive studies of the relationship of persistence to σ are in progress. The AGE was further enhanced by packaged DNA particles, in minor amount, that
formed band 2, as shown in Figure 6d. These particles (Figure 6d, fraction 10) sedimented
1.1× as far as the phage and were even more positively charged than the band 1 particles. ing. The major AGE-band increased dramatically in intensity after overnight incubation in 0.002 M EDTA (Figure 6d). This incubation has been found to cause expulsion of packaged DNA [23] and was used as a test for packaged DNA because DNA expulsion has been found [41] to dramatically increase staining relative to unpackaged DNA. Unpackaged DNA formed the sharp band in Figure 6c,d, fractions 1 and 2, a band that underwent only a minor increase in intensity in Figure 6d. Thus, t e dominant AGE-band in Figure 6c, fractions 8–10, was formed by phag particles. This conclusion was co firm d by staining of these particles with th p otei -specific stain, Coom ssie blue (not shown). Additional, possibly phage-related particles were reve led by the fluorescence intensity increase in Figure 6d. Some of these particles formed a band labeled 1 (t p right) in Figure 6d. Band 1 was formed by cathode-migrating particles, indicating a net positive σ. The band 1-particles almost co-sedimented with the egative-σ phages in the sucr se gradient, supporting the desig ation of both as phages. Slightly mor rapid sedimentation f r the band 1 particles is discernible via fraction numb r-dependence of band 1 i tensity. That is to say, phage 0105phi7-2 had at least two electrophoretically distinguishable, alternately charged states. This aspect has appare tly not been f und mong other doublestrand phages. In summary, as predicted above, the low persistence of phage 0105phi-7-2 was accompani d by σ that was eith r positive or low-magnitude negative. More extensive studies of the relationshi of persistence to σ are in progress. The AGE was further enhanced by packaged DNA particles, in minor amount, that formed band 2, as shown in Figure 6d. These particles (Figure 6d, fraction 10) sedimented 1.1× as far as the phage and were even more positively charged than the band 1 particles. Band 2 was also broader than band 1, suggesting particle heterogeneity. The higher sedimentation rate suggested something extra bound to the phage particles, as in Figure 7d. In Figure 7d, the variability of the size and shape of the phage-bound objects suggested that they were pieces of the host envelope. Lesser binding of this type might explain the slightly higher sedimentation rate of the band 1 particles. 3. discussion  3.1. dn vs. a plots: explanation for the change in slope DN vs. A plots had a change in slope at A = 0.2 for both phage T4, propagated on Escherichia coli, and phage 0105phi7-2, propagated on B. thuringiensis. Although with a smaller slope change, the same has been found true for a larger phage, 0305phi8-36, also propagated B. thuringiensis [18]. This change in slope was not explained in previous studies. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 8941 12 of 21
The following observations indicate that this change in slope is primarily an effect of the plaque-embedding gel on the bacterial host, not on the phage. Agarose is chemically inert to proteins and nucleic acids; that is why agarose/agar is used as an electrophoretic and a growth medium. Thus, we assume that the slope change is an effect of sieving. The particle being sieved must be close in size to the size of the effective diameter of pores of the 0.2% Seakem Gold agarose gel (2 × PE in [42]), given the abruptness of the slope change. At A = 0.2, the value of 2 × PE for Seakem LE agarose is 1480 nm [42]. Seakem Gold has a lower electro-osmosis and higher gel strength [43], which indicate an even larger 2 × PE at A = 0.2 [42]. The high gel strength of Seakem Gold is a major reason for its use in the current study. Neither phage 0105phi7-2 (head, <65 nm in diameter; tail, 150 nm long) nor phage T4 (head, 90–115 nm in diameter; tail, ~100 nm long [41]) is close in size to the 2 × PE of 1480 nm. Thus, the phages are too small to cause the change in slope via sieving. However, the bacterial hosts are about the right size to cause this change in slope. Both hosts are 500–700 nm wide and 1000–3000 nm long [44]. In fact, when these bacteria propagate in 0.6–0.8% Seakem Gold agarose gels, they are large enough so that, as they grow, they push aside fibers of the gel, as seen by electron microscopy [44]. Thus, we conclude that the increase in slope as A decreases below 0.2 (Figure 3) is caused primarily by increase in the freedom of bacterial motion, for both phage 0105phi7-2 and phage T4. 3.2. relationship of the motion of bacteria to the formation of large plaques in 0105phi7-2 However, the effect of A < 0.20 on plaque size is significantly greater for phage 0105phi7-2 than it is for phage T4, as seen in Figure 3a. The enhancement of phage plaques by ATPase-inhibiting orthovanadate implies that that ATP promotes phage propagation. One possibility is that ATP promotes phage head–host-cell binding, which is suggested by the observed head–host binding described in Section 2.1 (Figure 1c) and supported in Sections 2.5 and 2.7 (Figures 6d and 7d). The head–host-cell bound phages would be noninfective, until their heads detached from the host cell, for example, when a region of lower ATP concentration is reached. Thus, we propose the hypothesis that, for A below 0.2, (1) host mobility increase is accompanied by ATP-promoted phage head–host cell binding that results in “ride-hitching” on motile host cells, (2) 0105phi7-2 becomes noninfective when head-host bound, and (3) subsequently, at lower ATP concentration, 0105phi7-2 converts to tail–host binding, followed by DNA injection that is not detected in thin sections. This hypothesis explains the turbid strip between satellites and main plaque (Figure 4) as a region through which phages are transported in a mostly noninfective state. Via phage ride-hitching, this hypothesis also explains orthovanadate-induced increase in plaque size. The orthovanadate also has the potential to counter this stimulatory effect by inhibiting bacterial motility. Thus, the hypothesis includes the assumption that this counter-effect is, sometimes, smaller than the stimulatory effect on ride-hitching. Indeed, the nonuniformity of the presence of satellites (Figure 4) might be explained by inter-plaque variability in the outcome of competition between the stimulatory and counter-stimulatory effect of ATP on ride-hitching. A subtext is the hypothesis that in-gel propagating bacterial cells undergo nonthermal motion away from relatively high ATP concentrations. This is logical because high ATP concentrations signal the presence of cell-lysing particles. The phage counters by binding to the bacteria. Finally, the positive σ-state of the phage might be the state that is head– host-cell binding, given that the surfaces of bacteria are negatively charged [45,46]. If so, phage 0105phi7-2 must have a history of evolution in a semisolid medium that does not flow, i.e., a biofilm [47,48]. Otherwise, fluid flows, not cellular activities, are the dominant determinants of the positions of phages and host cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 8941 13 of 21 3.3. bacterial host and conditions of propagation The above hypothesis is consistent with the observation (Section 2.3) that phage 0105phi7-2 does not propagate in liquid culture, in that, by this hypothesis, phage 0105phi72 requires a biofilm-like (i.e., a gelled [47,48]) environment. This environment is provided here by an agarose gel. Our original use of in-gel propagation was designed, in part, to increase the probability of isolating biofilm-inhabiting phages. B. subtilis phage SPP1 [49,50] and Lactobacillus phage TP901-1 [51] were chosen as prototypes for comparison of the structural proteins of 0105phi7-2 because they have been characterized by cryo-EM and thus provided detailed information about the role of each protein in the phage structure. These are, however, not close relatives of 0105phi7-2, based on genomic sequence. They represent a very large section of siphophages, hosted by Gram-positive bacteria, with similar structure. BlastP searches of NCBI nr with 0105phi7-2 protein sequences reveal (1) at least nine isolated phages of B. thuringiensis that are much closer to 0105phi7-2 in a mosaic pattern of similarity and (2) innumerable matches to proteins from segments of B. thuringiensis chromosomes, segments that are presumptive prophages or prophage remnants. The extent to which the unusual growth properties of 0105phi7-2 are distributed in the population of close relatives is unknown. 3.4. physical and chemical phage properties: assembly Phage 0105phi7-2 is found here to have two properties that can help simplify analysis of phage DNA packaging. First, the partially decondensed genomes provide improved access to the conformation of the packaged genome. For example, the axis observed in images of these genomes (Figure 7b,c) implies a similar axis of the fully packaged genome and also that this axis (1) is coincident with the channel of DNA entry and (2) formed without assistance of additional coaxial internal proteins, such as those found [52] in phages T3 and T7. The second property is low assembly assistance for gp6 (no scaffolding protein; minimal, if any, N-terminal peptide removed during assembly). The only apparent example of comparably short peptide removal is the removal of an approximately 14-amino acid peptide from the N-terminus of the major head protein of siphophage 80a of Staphylococcus aureus [53]. However, a scaffolding protein was present in this case. This property of 0105phi7-2 suggests a lower conformation-based energy barrier between the procapsid and mature capsid states of the major head protein. Reasoning by analogy with coliphage P2 [54], 0105phi7-2 scaffolding might be generated by a peptide released from the C-terminal region of gp5 by the N-terminal protease activity of gp5. Relatively low energy-barrier transitions of this protein can also explain the finding of two electrophoretically (σ)-defined states of the mature phage. A similar finding, though with less difference in σ-values, has been made for phage T7. In the case of T7, both states had negative σ and phages in the least negative-σ state were more adsorptive to host cells [55]. Flexibility for T7 state interconversion appears to be assisted by the presence of major head protein molecules of two different lengths [55]. Both electrophoretic states of 0105phi7-2 are relatively low in negative surface charge, which is reasonably thought to promote low blood persistence. Low murine blood persistence is, indeed, found here for 0105phi7-2 (Figure 10). More work is needed to determine how completely low persistence is correlated with a relatively low component of negative surface charges. Efficient screening out of low-persistence phages, possibly based on σ, is expected to improve phage therapy of infectious disease [37]. Thus, this work appears to be at the top of the priority list for phage therapy. 