Understanding the mechanics of fiber attrition during the extrusion process is highly important in predicting the strength of long fiber-reinforced thermoplastic composites. However, little work has been done to investigate the mechanics of fiber dispersion and its effects on fiber attrition. This study aims at investigating fiber dispersion in simple shear flows for long fiberreinforced thermoplastic pellets. Depending on the fabrication process, fiber bundles display distinct levels of compaction within the pellets. Studies have shown that morphological differences can lead to differences in dispersion mechanics; therefore, using a Couette rheometer and a sliding plate rheometer, coated and pultruded pellets were subjected to simple shear deformation, and the amount of dispersion was quantified. Additionally, a new image-based analysis method is presented in this study to measure fiber dispersion for a multi-pellet-filled system. Results from the single-pellet dispersion study showed a small amount of correlation between the dimensionless morphological parameter and the dispersion measurement. Pultruded and coated pellets were both found to have similar dispersion rates in a multi-pellet system. However, pultruded pellets were found to have a higher dispersion value at all levels when compared with coated pellets in both dispersion studies. 1. conclusions The dispersion mechanism for a single fiber-induced polypropylene pellet was studied. Pellets were characterized by the morphological properties of the fiber bundles. A singlepellet dispersion study was carried out to identify the effect of a bundle’s perimeter and size on its initial dispersion mechanism. Results showed that the proposed shape parameter had a small amount of correlation between the dimensionless morphological parameter and the dispersion measurement. The shape parameter had no correlation when comparing pultruded and coated pellets, as both materials showed distinct dispersion values even when pellets had the same S parameter value. A multi-pellet system was also used to study the fibers’ dispersion mechanics. A new method for measuring dispersion is proposed, where a non-dispersed sample and a fully dispersed sample are used as a reference scale. Samples were scanned using X-ray imaging and measured for homogeneity based on the pixel intensity from the scanned image. Results demonstrate that pultruded pellets achieved a higher value of dispersion more rapidly than coated pellets. However, coated pellets reached a similar level of dispersion at the 30 s time interval, at which point the dispersion rate of the pultruded pellets also appeared to level off. It was furthermore shown that fiber dispersion followed a similar exponential dispersion behavior to that of carbon black agglomerates. 