The transition to secondary school may negatively impact adolescents’ psychosocial and subjective well-being development. However, how subjective well-being develops during secondary school and how school contextual factors, including aspects of ability grouping and achievement composition, are associated with the development of subjective well-being still require clarification. This study examined two measures of subjective well-being, life satisfaction and school satisfaction, to investigate the development of subjective well-being during secondary school. Moreover, school context variations in the form of school tracks and school-level achievement were analyzed to examine the extent to which ability grouping and achievement composition were associated with the development of subjective well-being. A large-scale longitudinal German dataset with four measurement points from grades 6 to 10 was analyzed (Time 1: N= 1,841; Mage= 12.20, SD= 0.81; 48.4% female; 45.3% immigrant students). The latent growth model revealed that life satisfaction and school satisfaction decreased statistically significantly during secondary school, yet school satisfaction showed a temporary increase between the end of primary school and right after the transition to secondary school. School tracks did not statistically significantly predict the magnitude of the decline in life satisfaction or school satisfaction. Only school-level achievement composition significantly negatively predicted the decline in life satisfaction, suggesting that students in schools with higher levels of achievement composition had a greater decrease in life satisfaction than their counterparts in schools with lower levels of achievement composition. Taken together, these findings contribute to the knowledge of how life and school satisfaction develop during secondary school and the long-term associations between subjective well-being and school context factors. conclusion Adolescents generally experience environmental misfit during their transition to secondary school, leading to a decline in important psychosocial dimensions. A critical research gap remains regarding the development of subjective well-being and its associations with school contexts. This study investigates the development of life satisfaction and school satisfaction during secondary school, and how
two important school contextual factors—ability grouping and achievement composition—are associated with the development of life and school satisfaction. The results underscore that both life satisfaction and school satisfaction decline during secondary school, supporting the StageEnvironment-Fit model (Eccles et al., 1993). The results further highlight that the developmental shape of school satisfaction differed from life satisfaction, which is rather in line with a bottom-up perspective of life satisfaction (Diener, 1984). Particularly, the decline in life satisfaction is associated with achievement composition, underscoring the relevance of achievement performance in secondary school environments for the development of life satisfaction, which is in line with the Stage-Environment-Fit model and the Big-Fish-Little-Pond effect. Taken together, these findings emphasize the difference between the developmental shapes of global and domain-specific subjective well-being and their longitudinal context sensitivity