The increasing penetration of renewable energy sources tends to redirect the power systems community’s interest from the traditional power grid model towards the smart grid framework. During this transition, load forecasting for various time horizons constitutes an essential electric utility task in network planning, operation, and management. This paper presents a novel mixed power-load forecasting scheme for multiple prediction horizons ranging from 15 min to 24 h ahead. The proposed approach makes use of a pool of models trained by several machine-learning methods with different characteristics, namely neural networks, linear regression, support vector regression, random forests, and sparse regression. The final prediction values are calculated using an online decision mechanism based on weighting the individual models according to their past performance. The proposed scheme is evaluated on real electrical load data sensed from a high voltage/medium voltage substation and is shown to be highly effective, as it results in R2 coefficient values ranging from 0.99 to 0.79 for prediction horizons ranging from 15 min to 24 h ahead, respectively. The method is compared to several state-of-the-art machine-learning approaches, as well as a different ensemble method, producing highly competitive results in terms of prediction accuracy. 1. conclusions and guidelines for future work are outlined in Section 6. 2. materials and methods  2.1. machine-learning methods short description As mentioned earlier, multiple machine-learning methods are involved in the proposed approach. In this subsection, a short description of each one of these methods is provided. Here, we provide a short description of each one of them. 2.1.1. Linear Regression
LR is considered a standard method for addressing problems such as time series prediction, outlier detection, reliability analysis, and feature selection. The regression analysis method is basically a curve-fitting problem. Given a training dataset, (yn, xn), yn ∈ R, xn ∈ Rl , n = 1, 2, . . . , l, where yn ∈ R represents the output or dependent variable and xn ∈ Rl , n = 1, 2, . . . , l represents the input vector or regressor [77], the aim is to find a function, f , which fits the data. Subsequently, when an unknown data point x∗
Sensors 2023, 23, 5436 6 of 25
appears, we can use this function in order to calculate/predict the respective output y∗ [19]. Equation (1) describes the relation between the input and output variables. y = θTx + η (1)
The objective of a regression problem is the estimation of regression coefficients vector θ which arises through the solution of a least squares problem. θ̂ = ( xTx )−1 xTy (2)
Although more modern and advanced methods have been developed, LR is still used due to its simplicity and robustness, which are of great importance, especially in online implementation of load forecasting. However, the inability of the method to extract the non-linear behavior of the load is an important disadvantage. 2.1.2. Sparse Coding When addressing a linear system, for example x = Dα, x ∈ Rm×n, α ∈ Rk×n, the number of predictors, p, can be extremely large. Thus, it is impossible to fit a linear model when p < m, or even when p ≈ m without overfitting (depending on the noise level), but it may still be possible to fit a sparse linear model that only depends on a reduced number of predictors s, where s < p. The dictionary D ∈ Rm×k is underdetermined, and therefore, the linear system has infinite possible solutions. An interesting observation is that the aforementioned models have equally high percentages in the sixth rank. Thus, these methods either achieve very good or poor performance. This observation is quite significant and strongly enhances the usefulness and effectiveness of our proposed method. The percentages of the rest of the pool models are, in most cases, divided into the intermediate rankings, with the exception of the high percentage of SVR in the sixth rank for the 6-h horizon. 6. conclusions and prospects Achieving reliable electric load forecasts is of paramount importance for the smooth operation of electric power grids. However, the intrinsic volatility of the electric load makes its prediction particularly hard. Therefore, we assume that the load behavior is influenced by multiple input variables, which differ depending on the data to be predicted. The mixed load forecasting task has been addressed by a variety of machine-learning methods, and it has been observed that none is able to provide equally accurate results for any testing dataset. In the present study, a mixed power-load forecasting model is introduced, which employs the predictions coming from several individual models, namely MLP and RBF neural networks, LR, SVR, RF, and SR. These forecasts are weighted based on how accurate they have been and then added to calculate the final forecast value. The proposed model provides predictions for different time horizons, spanning from 15 min to 24 h. The extended results presented using real data sensed from a high voltage/medium voltage substation show the superiority of this novel approach compared to all the individual models as well as an MLP model ensemble for every prediction horizon tested. Thus, the proposed multi-model forecasting scheme constitutes a powerful method capable of greatly enhancing the operation of the modern electricity grid, with potential practical applications in network planning, operation, and management. It should be noted here that a limitation of the present study is that it did not involve predictions for long-term horizons. Although investigating longer prediction horizons is outside the scope of this work, we believe the proposed model ensemble could serve as the basis for designing such a tool. On the other hand, it is quite probable that a different set of input variables, presenting higher correlation with the long-term evolution of the mixed load would be needed in this case. Driven by the remarkable performance of the proposed methodology in mixed load forecasting, its application could be extended to other critical sectors of the smart grid, such as forecasting the electricity price and the production from RES, in order to more efficiently schedule conventional sources.