As the fourth most important cancer management strategy except surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, cancer immunotherapy has been confirmed to elicit durable antitumor effects in the clinic by leveraging the patient’s own immune system to eradicate the cancer cells. However, the limited population of patients who benefit from the current immunotherapies and the immune related adverse events hinder its development. The immunosuppressive microenvironment is the main cause of the failure, which leads to cancer immune evasion and immunity cycle blockade. Encouragingly, nanotechnology has been engineered to enhance the efficacy and reduce off-target toxicity of their therapeutic cargos by spatiotemporally controlling the biodistribution and release kinetics. Among them, lipidbased nanoparticles are the first nanomedicines to make clinical translation, which are now established platforms for diverse areas. In this perspective, we discuss the available lipid-based nanoparticles in research and market here, then describe their application in cancer immunotherapy, with special emphasis on the T cells-activated and macrophagestargeted delivery system. Through perpetuating each step of cancer immunity cycle, lipid-based nanoparticles can reduce immunosuppression and promote drug delivery to trigger robust antitumor response. conclusions In this review, we described lipid-based nanoparticles and their application in cancer immunotherapy, especially those targeting T lymphocytes and macrophages. As the special examples discussed above, nanoparticles could yield robust antitumor immune effects through enhancing different steps of cancer immunity cycle when they were wellestablished by diverse functionalized delivery platforms. In a time-space controlled way, nanoparticles can be endowed with the properties of targeting, sustained release, and even stimuli-responsiveness, thus can exert better antitumor efficiency and reduce off-target toxicity than their free payloads. Due to the safety profile and easily modified quality of biocompatible and biodegradable lipid materials, nanoparticles formulated by various lipids achieved great success in clinical translation, especially liposomes and LNPs. Therefore, lipid-based nanoparticles have promising development in the area of cancer immunotherapy. However, there is a huge disconnect between a large body of literature describing diverse nanoparticles for potential cancer immunotherapy and a handful of marketed once approved by FDA [271], which suggests that there are much more recognized or unknown challenges we need to surmount. For example, the tropism of nanoparticles for MPS make its efficiency and safety unclear [22]. Metaanalysis showed that only 0.7 % (median) of nanoparticles could be successfully delivered to solid tumors [25], and about 30–99 % of them would be absorbed and retained by the liver and spleen after administration [272], whichmay be the main reason for limiting the clinical translation of preparations for intravenous administration. Besides, highly reproducible fabrication method of relatively complexed nano-delivery system is also a great obstacle confronting the further development of nanoparticles [23]. The weak correlation between in vitro and in vivo effects, as well as small animal and large animalmodels is another dilemma we can’t evade. On the one hand, novel research tools are in urgent need to permit more accurate and real analysis, such as cell activation state (mass cytometry) and cell type (multiplexed ion beam imaging) instead of conventional method, such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and flow cytometry [23]. On the other hand, advanced ex vivo evaluation models can mimic human physiological environment in a more precise way, while
avoiding time-consuming animal experiments. For example, transplantable lymphoid-like organoids can already be welldesigned to obtain accurate anatomy and physiology, and the deposition of special cytokines, immune cells andmatrix can be achieved precisely through 3D printing. This advance will contribute to our comprehensive understanding of the influence and fate of nanoparticles in the immune microenvironment [273]. Besides, low drug loading capacity and premature drug release in vivo of lipid-based nanoparticles need to be addressed before entering the clinical trials. It is hoped that this reviewwill prove essential in future innovations of drug delivery system for cancer immunotherapy.