Introduction: The role of COVID-19 regarding in-hospital complications and poor outcomes for patients with ischaemic stroke (IS) is still important to explore. The aim of this study was to evaluate the risk of inhospital lethality for IS patients respectively to their comorbidities and in-hospital complications in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Methods: We identified 1898 acute IS patients (749 men and 1149 women) admitted to the Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kaunas Hospital, Lithuania, from December 2020 to February 2022. The sociodemographic, clinical, and outcome features of the patients were evaluated deploying appropriate statistical tests. Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals were estimated by the Cox proportional hazards regression for hospital lethality. Results: The risk of in-hospital lethality was 2.22 times higher in men suffering from IS and chronic ischaemic heart disease (cIHD) compared to those with IS and isolated arterial hypertension (iAH) (p < 0.05). COVID-19 elevated the risk of in-hospital lethality in men by 3.16 times (p < 0.05). In comorbid women with type two diabetes mellitus (DM) or cIHD, the risk of in-hospital lethality was two times higher compared to those with iAH (p < 0.05). The risk of in-hospital lethality increased significantly in both men and women, with the total number of in-hospital complications increasing per one unit. Conclusions: Of the comorbidities studied, DM and cIHD together with COVID-19 elevated the risk of inhospital lethality significantly. Within the acute in-hospital complications, pneumonia with respiratory failure and acute renal failure showed the most significant prognostic value anticipating lethal outcomes for IS patients. Categories: Neurology, Infectious Disease, Epidemiology/Public Health conclusions COVID-19 diagnosis and in-hospital complications (pneumonia, respiratory failure, and acute renal failure) significantly increased the risk of in-hospital lethality in the IS men group. The comorbidities (DM and chronic IHD) and in-hospital complications (pneumonia and respiratory failure) significantly increased the risk of in-hospital lethality in the IS women group. The risk of hospital lethality significantly increased in men and women with the increasing total number of in-hospital complications. Results of the present study indicate that the spectrum of pre-existing comorbidities and acute in-hospital complications predict inhospital lethality in IS survivors, and in the context of the pandemic, further investigations are needed on the possibilities to reduce in-hospital deaths in stroke patients. 2023 Jasukaitienė et al. Cureus 15(9): e45553. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45553 8 of 10
