Alternaria solani and Phytophthora infestans cause early and late blight diseases in tomato and potato, respectively. A. solani can survive for more than a decade in the soil, seed, or in plant residues at optimum temperature. Te pathogen exhibits high molecular and genetic variation between isolates from potato and tomato plants, in diferent countries. Morphological studies reveal separate conidia borne singly on simple conidiophores. Spores are elongated, muriform, beaked, septate, and dark coloured. Te mycelia are branched and septate. A. solani demonstrated a high genetic variability among isolates originating from the United States, Greece, Cuba, Canada, Russia, Turkey, South Africa, Brazil, and China based on vegetative compatibility groups and molecular markers (random amplifed polymorphic DNA markers, random amplifed microsatellite markers, and amplifed fragment length polymorphisms). Diferent morphological and molecular variations indicate the presence of variability among the isolates. On the other hand, P. infestans is a diploid, obligate, heterothallic, and biotrophic oomycete, whose asexual lifecycle is characterized by alternating phases of sporangia germination, hyphal growth, and sporulation. Te mycelia of P. infestans is coenocytic, multinucleate, and aseptate although the cross walls do not form in old cultures. Sporangia are borne singly on the branch tips of the alternately branched sporangiophore. Sporangium is hyaline and lemon shaped with a papilla at the distal end. Mating types A1 and A2with diferent clonal lineages have been discovered in various parts of the world indicating variation in the species. 1. conclusion Te knowledge of genetic diversity of plant pathogens is important in selection of resistance genes in breeding programs. Terefore, the use of decision support systems should be incorporated to the management of early blight and late blight on potato and tomato crops to optimize fungicide spraying, avoiding environmental contamination, and the selection of resistant isolates. Preventive control with protectant fungicides must be always conducted. Further studies are necessary to reveal the aggressiveness, distribution, symptoms’ pattern in the feld, and diference in ftness of the species.