We examined whether and how birth outcomes and prenatal care utilization among Latina mothers changed over time across years associated with the Trump sociopolitical environment, using restricted-use birth records from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). To assess potential variation among subpopulations, we disaggregated the analyses by maternal nativity and country/region of origin. Our results indicate that both USand foreign-born Latina mothers experienced increasingly higher risks of delivering low birthweight (LBW) and preterm birth (PTB) infants over the years associated with Trump’s political career. Among foreign-born Latinas, adverse birth outcomes increased significantly among mothers from Mexico and Central America but not among mothers from Puerto Rico, Cuba, and South America. Levels of inadequate prenatal care utilization remained largely unchanged among groups who saw increases in LBW and PTB, suggesting that changes in prenatal care did not generally explain the observed worsening of birth outcomes among Latina mothers during the Trump era. Results from this study draw attention to the possibility that the Trump era may have represented a source of chronic stress among the Latinx population in the US and add to the growing body of literature linking racism and xenophobia in the sociopolitical environment to declines in health among Latinx people, especially among targeted groups from Mexico and Central America. conclusion Our findings add important and timely updates to the growing literature on the temporal linkages between the Trump sociopolitical environment and adverse birth outcomes among Latina mothers in the US [13,14]. In their recent study examining changes in birth outcomes among the aggregate population of Latina mothers, Gemmill and colleagues find that the risk of PTB increased by 3.2–3.6% in the year following Trump’s 2016 presidential election [13]. Our results show that the risks of adverse birth outcomes continued to increase in the subsequent years of Trump’s presidential term, and that the worsening of birth outcomes were most severe among foreign-born Mexican mothers. By extending the period of investigation to account for Trump’s entire political career, and by analyzing births across nativity and country/region of origin, our findings draw attention to the possibility that the Trump era may have represented a source of chronic stress among Latina mothers, and provide new evidence on how racism in the sociopolitical environment may vary across subgroups within the Latinx population. A growing body of literature emphasizes the embodied stress that Latinx people in the US
experienced during Trump’s political career, due to his racist and anti-immigrant rhetoric and policy [1–9]. Building off existing work in this area, we analyzed restricted-use natality files to provide the first nationwide study of changes in birth and prenatal care outcomes during the Trump era among Latina mothers. Net of changes in maternal sociodemographic characteristics, our results suggest that periods following Trump’s presidential campaign, election, and administration were associated with particularly sizeable increases in low birthweight and preterm birth among infants born in the US to immigrant mothers from Mexico. supporting information  s1 file. (DOCX) author contributions Conceptualization: Carmen Gutierrez. Data curation: Carmen Gutierrez.