Early indicator traits for swine reproduction and longevity support economical selection decision-making. Activity is a key variable impacting a sow’s herd life and productivity. Early-life activities could contribute to farrowing traits including gestation length (GL), number born alive (NBA), and number weaned (NW). Beginning at 20 weeks of age, 480 gilts were video recorded for 7 consecutive days and processed using the NUtrack system. Activity traits included angle rotated (radians), average speed (m/s), distance traveled (m), time spent eating (s), lying lateral (s), lying sternal (s), standing (s), and sitting (s). Final daily activity values were averaged across the period under cameras. Parity one data were collected for all gilts considered. Data were analyzed using linear regression models (R version 4.0.2). GL was significantly impacted by angle rotated (p = 0.03), average speed (p = 0.07), distance traveled (p = 0.05), time spent lying lateral (p = 0.003), and lying sternal (0.02). NBA was significantly impacted by time spent lying lateral (p = 0.01), lying sternal (p = 0.07), and time spent sitting (p = 0.08). NW was significantly impacted by time spent eating (p = 0.09), time spent lying lateral (p = 0.04), and time spent sitting (p = 0.007). This analysis suggests early-life gilt activities are associated with sow productivity traits of importance. Further examination of the link between behaviors compiled utilizing NUtrack and reproductive traits is necessitated to further isolate behavioral differences for potential use in selection decisions. 1. conclusions The results of this analysis showed a connection between the objectively measured NUtrack activity traits collected during the growing phase and parity one gestation length, number born alive, and number weaned. Further, these results validate the NUtrack system’s ability to detect and continuously monitor group-housed livestock activity. The regression models in this study show a significant linear relationship between the activity traits and parity one farrowing records, suggesting potential for early-life activity to serve as an indicator for parity one farrowing performance. In addition, multiple regression models were tested for each reproductive trait. The results of model comparison indicate that each reproductive trait is best predicted by a single NUtrack trait. Overall, increased time spent lying lateral had a consistent, favorable effect on reproductive outcomes. In addition, increased time spent lying sternal had a stable, negative impact on reproductive outcomes. These results suggest that time spent lying lateral and time spent lying sternal could serve as important early-life behavioral indicators of mothering ability.