The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of the simulated saliva–gastrointestinal digestion of AABP-2B on its structural features, inhibitory α-glucosidase activity, and human gut microbiota. The salivary–gastrointestinal digestion results show that there is no significant change in the molecular weight of AABP-2B, and no free monosaccharides are released. This indicates that, under a simulated digestive condition, AABP-2B is not degraded and can be further utilized by gut microbiota. AABP-2B still possessed good inhibitory activity on α-glucosidase after salivary– gastrointestinal digestion, which may be attributed to the largely unchanged structural characteristics of AABP-2B after simulated digestion. Furthermore, in vitro fecal fermentation with AABP-2B after salivary–gastrointestinal digestion showed that AABP-2B modulated the gut microbiota structure and increased the relative proportions of Prevotella, Faecalibacterium, and Megasphaera. AABP-2B can also modify the intestinal flora composition by inhibiting pathogen growth. Moreover, the AABP-2B group resulted in a significant increase in short-chain fatty acid (SCFAs) content during fermentation. These findings demonstrate that AABP-2B can be used as a prebiotic or functional food to promote 1. conclusions In general, the results show that during digestion, the molecular weight of AABP2B does not chang significantly, and there is no monosaccharide in the digestive juice. These results indicate th t AABP-2B is stable u der simulated digestion conditions and can enter the large intestine to be utilized by the intestinal flora. Moreover, after salivary– gastrointestinal digestion, AABP-2B still possessed good α-glucosidase inhibitory activity. During AABP-2B fermentation, the pH decreased significantly, whereas total SCFAs, including propionic, acetic, and n-butyric acids, significantly increased. Therefore, it is speculated that the changes in SCFAs may be related to the fermentation of AABP-2B by intestinal flora. Additionally, AABP-2B modified the composition of the intestinal flora by increasing the relative amounts of beneficial bacteria, such as Faecalibacterium, Prevotella, and Megasphaera. Furthermore, AABP-2B can alter the gut microbiota composition by inhibiting the growth of pathogens. Thus, AABP-2B may be used as a prebiotic or functional food to improve gut health. Meanwhile, there were certain limitations to this study. As in vitro studies are inherently different from in vivo research, the findings presented herein cannot be directly correlated with biological responses. Nutrients 2023, 15, 1965 13 of 14