Stigma remains a significant problem globally, creating barriers to services for individuals in need, regardless of access to services. The stigma of COVID-19 primarily happened because it is a new disease with several unknowns, and these unknowns generate fear. This study aimed to conduct a psychometric development and evaluate the Public COVID19 Stigma Scale that follows the Indonesian community’s cultural background. This study used research and development design to measure the COVID-19 stigma through six steps that include seven dimensions and is culturally sensitive, starting from a literature review through to psychometric evaluation. This study was community based and was conducted in 26 regions in the Sumedang Regency. The research and development step ran from July 2021 to November 2022, with a total of 1,686 respondents. The results showed that the social stigma scale for COVID-19 consisted of 11 valid and reliable items that were separated into seven dimensions: social distancing (1 item), traditional prejudice (7 items), exclusionary sentiments (2 items), negative affect (2 items), treatment carryover (1 item), disclosure carryover (2 items), and perception of dangerousness (1 item). conclusions. Confirmability was accomplished by recording and making field notes systematically. Transferability was handled by ensuring that participants
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283870 April 5, 2023 4 / 13
met the criteria and objectives of the study and observing the principles that the collected data were saturated. Thus, data triangulation was carried out during the interactive cycle until the final stage of verification and conclusion. After the data were collected, the data analysis began with data reduction in the form of selection for simplification and focus on information obtained with coding to determine the theme. The last stage is verification or concluding in the form of meanings that are explored in depth and thoroughly to describe the experiences and perceptions of survivors and the COVID-19 Task Force regarding the COVID-19 stigma. Step III: Development of initial instrument items
In this step, the researcher integrated the theoretical concept of the literature review results and the themes from the qualitative study results to create a set of instrument items to measure COVID-19 stigma. The data from the literature review and the qualitative study were then used as the basis for researchers to develop instrument items. After the results were combined, seven dimensions related to COVID-19 stigma were obtained: 1) social distancing, 2) traditional prejudice, 3) exclusionary sentiments, 4) negative affect, 5) treatment carryover, 6) disclosure carryover, and 7) perceptions of dangerousness. Each dimension had a different number of items. The social distancing dimension had 32 items, the traditional prejudice dimension consisted of 15 items, the exclusionary sentiments dimension had 14 items, the negative affect dimension consisted of 11 items, the treatment carryover dimension comprised 4 items, the disclosure carryover dimension had 16 items, and the perceptions of dangerousness dimension consisted of 31 items. Thus, the initial instrument item set contained 123 statement items answered on a Likert scale with selections of “strongly agree,” “agree,” “don’t know,” “disagree,” or “strongly disagree.”
Step IV: Content validity assessed by experts
The instruments compiled in the third step were now tested for content by experts. The research team selected the experts based on nursing, public health, and psychology expertise. In addition, these experts are known to have good clinical practice experience and competence in translating knowledge about social behavior theory, measurement, and evaluation. The researchers corresponded via email and personal chat with the experts. Six experts participated: two in the field of nursing, two in the field of public health, and two in psychology. They were asked to rate the instrument items based on fitness for purpose, consistency, redundancy, and clarity of statements on a “yes” and “no” dichotomy scale. They were also asked to provide comments and suggestions for improvement. The experts’ input was used to revise the set of instrument items before proceeding to the quantitative trial step. Step V: Initial trial of the instrument
As an initial trial of the instrument to assess the performance of psychometry, a pilot study was conducted using an online survey with 113 respondents. The results of the content test and psychometric analysis were then revised according to the input before the second stage of the psychometric test was carried out on several different respondents. Step VI: Psychometric instrument set
After the pilot study was carried out and analyzed, followed by revision of the instrument item set, the final step was a psychometric test. A total of 1,689 respondents were used measure the COVID-19 stigma instrument based on seven dimensions so that a valid and reliable last instrument item set was obtained. Respondents in this survey was 17 years old and above. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283870 April 5, 2023 5 / 13
According to Indonesian law Number 24 Year 2013, people aged 17 years old are considered adult and can have their own national identity card. data analysis Data analysis of the COVID-19 stigma instrument varied according to the research method at each stage. Data analyses were carried out thematically and interactively for qualitative research. The research team analyzed the data with the interactive method [2]. Interactive analysis is a cycle that compares the components of data reduction, data display, and verification since data collection. In this analysis cycle, researchers can freely move continuously on each of the data reduction, display, and verification elements. For the quantitative stage, psychometric data analyses used the RASCH model. results After going through several stages of instrument item set development, the fifth step involved the initial trial of the instrument item set on 1,689 respondents. Instruments were distributed and filled out online and via social media. This section explicitly reports the findings from the sixth step. The psychometric measurement of the revised instrument item set was carried out with
1,689 respondents. Inclusion criteria included participants age 17 years and older, including both COVID-19 survivors and non-COVID-19 survivors. Table 1 shows the demographic characteristics of respondents measuring the seven-dimension COVID-19 stigma instrument. Of the 1,686 respondents, most respondents were women aged 17 to 30 years, were high
school graduates, worked as entrepreneurs, and had not been exposed to COVID-19. Table 2 shows the seven dimensions of the COVID-19 stigma instrument after data analyses were conducted. Cronbach’s alpha value measures reliability, namely the interaction between the person and
the item. Cronbach’s Alpha value in the COVID-19 stigma instrument is +0.96, with a very good category. The value of person reliability is +0.94, and item reliability is +0.94. It can be concluded that the consistency of the answers from the respondents is excellent. INFIT MNSQ and OUTFIT MNSQ, had average values for the person of 0.99, and the ideal weight was 1.00 (the closer to 1.00, the better). For INFIT ZSTD and OUTFIT ZSTD, the average value in the person was 0.99 and 0.88, where the ideal value is 0.0 (the closer the value to 0.0, the better the quality). After the analysis, the final set of instrument items for measuring COVID-19 social stigma
on a scale with seven dimensions consisted of 11 items that were infit and do not have any bias, as shown in Table 3. discussion This study develop COVID-19 social stigma scale that consist of 11 statements using seven dimensions of social stigma namely social distance, traditional prejudice, exclusionary sentiments, negative affect, treatment carryover, disclosure carryover, and perceptions of dangerousness [11]. The current study found different aspects that were found in a study in Thailand used a 10-item COVID—Public Stigma Scale (COVID-PSS) consisting of a three-factor structure: stereotype, prejudice, and fear in the community [13]. The current study found that social distancing is practiced among society. Social stigma toward those who are segregated in association with the COVID-19 patients who requires isolation; terms such as quarantine and social distancing have become a part of the common vocabulary [17]. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283870 April 5, 2023 6 / 13
Stigma can be seen as a stereotype resulting from individuals’ behaviors toward others [18]. Stigma and discrimination can arise due to ignorance about the mechanism of disease transmission. Ensuring that health-care workers have adequate knowledge about a disease is fundamental to minimizing any stigma associated with that disease [19]. Stigma is not only directed toward the patients infected but also toward people recovered
from COVID-19 or those who have been released from home isolation or quarantine and even toward frontline workers involved with COVID-19 patients [17]. This current study also found similar findings for the treatment carry over and disclosure carryover. The fear of loss of financial security have led to increased anxiety, stress, and depression [17]. Stigma is also related to the perception that infected people will put others at risk of infection. Many patients are not received or treated well by their health-care workers, friends, and family members [20]. The domain of stigma is a negative label for people who are stigmatized. Stigma consists of fear, pity, needing help, avoiding, blaming, anger, separation, being dangerous to others, and coercive actions taken toward the patient [18]. This negative stamp needs to be explained to the community so that these stigma domains no longer occur. There are several types of stigma: social or public stigma, perceived stigma, secondary
stigma, self-stigma (stigma for oneself), experienced stigma, and structural stigma [21]. Of these various types, social stigma and structural stigma require serious attention. Social stigma is a negative attitude, belief, and label within the community or general public toward individuals with a disease. This social stigma against COVID-19 sufferers can lead to social isolation characteristics frequency percentage gender  age  education  occupation  exposure to covid-19 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283870.t001
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283870 April 5, 2023 7 / 13
of patients, negative prejudices toward them, exclusion from the community, and other negative effects. Even when they have recovered, those with COVID-19 are still considered to bring disease and are thought to be dangerous to society [11]. The other stigma that must be considered is the structural stigma carried out by an agency,
company, or law that rejects sick people. This includes social conditions, cultural norms, and institutional practices that limit the stigmatized population’s opportunities, resources, and well-being. Both types of stigma can have an impact on social isolation and lead to the failure to seek care to cope with the disease [21]. For patients with COVID-19, these two stigmas can cause them to not seek medical attention and treatment when they have COVID-19 symptoms.