Background Many researchers have examined the impact of social insurance on health in elderly. However, in most cases, they have only demonstrated correlational results and have not been able to determine causal effects, possibly because confounding biases have not been fully addressed. In this study, we investigated the health effects of the New Rural Pension Scheme (NRPS) on the elderly (age≥60 years old) with chronic diseases in rural areas, and to explore the causal relationship and effects of NRPS and health status. Methods This paper used data from the 2018 China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) and applied Bayesian networks and fuzzy regression discontinuity design to conduct causal analysis. Bayesian networks were used to explore the causal directed acyclic graphs of factors related to NRPS and health status. Based on the results of Bayesian network, a fuzzy regression discontinuity design was employed to estimate the causal effect of NRPS on health status. Results Among rural elderly with chronic diseases, Bayesian network mapping of causal relationships among NRPS, health status and covariates showed that age was a common cause of NRPS receipt and satisfaction with health. The results of the fuzzy regression discontinuity analysis showed that the effect of receiving NRPS on the health status was positive, but there was no statistically significant difference concerning the interval estimates. The results of the subgroup analysis with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma indicated that the effect of NRPS receipt on the health status of elderly people with COPD was positive. There was a statistically significant effect of receiving NRPS on self-rated health description ( β1 = 3.653, P = 0.032 ) and health satisfaction ( β1 = 4.204, P = 0.033 ) in COPD population and a statistically significant effect of receiving NRPS on health satisfaction in asthma population ( β1 = 9.844, P = 0.008). Conclusion This paper has confirmed the contribution and positive causal effect of NRPS on health status in a subgroup of older adults with COPD and asthma, using the CHARLS database as evidence. Thus, Chinese government should increase the take-up rate of the NRPS to enhance their positive impact on health status of elderly people with chronic diseases in rural areas. conclusions drawn are of a higher level of argument than those of regression models and correlation analysis. In this paper, we
use Bayesian networks to provide exploratory hypotheses and fuzzy regression discontinuity design to estimate causal effect values, and these two causal inference methods are cascaded. Another advantage of this paper is that this study considered elderly with chronic diseases who were always in poorer health and at high risk of mortality. By using subgroup analyses to examine the impact of the NRPS on the health status of different chronic disease populations, the conclusions drawn are more pertinent. limitations There are several limitations to our study. First of all, the health status of people is difficult to measure accurately. Both the self-rated health score and the satisfaction with health score were considered as indicators of health status, but this measurement may still be subject to subjective bias. Secondly, we used data from the CHARLS 2018 survey to describe the latest effects of NRPS on the health status of the elderly with chronic diseases. Therefore, we cannot provide information with longitudinal data. Thirdly, it should be pointed out that due to the limited data availability, the paper does not include information on the health status of older adults with chronic diseases in rural areas after 2020, i.e., during the epidemic of COVID-19. These questions further need to be answered by offering more theoretical and empirical evidence. For example, follow-up studies can be conducted based on the latest CHARLS survey data and consider longitudinal changes in the data over time to provide more comprehensive evidence on the implementation of the NRPS policy in the context of the new coronavirus. subgroup outcome bandwidth parameter coefficient standard error z p 95% ci  conclusion This study tries to investigate the impact of NRPS on health status for elderly people with chronic disease in rural China. The univariate analyses showed that selfrated health and satisfaction with health did not significantly differ between the groups of recipients and non-recipients of NRPS before adjusting for any covariates using RDD. Compared to those who did not receive the NPRS, among those who did receive the NPRS, there were fewer low-income people, more Han Chinese, fewer married people, more people living in rural areas, lower levels of education and fewer children. And more elderly who smoked, drank and suffered from chronic diseases including (hypertension, COPD, heart disease, stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, Arthritis rheumatism) received NRPS. The empirical results have shown that NRPS has a positive causal effect on the health status of older adults with COPD and asthma. Further, the stepwise ordinal Logistic regressions indicated that annual income has a positive effect on health status. The causal path from annual income to health status was demonstrated in a Bayesian network as well. Abbreviations BNs Bayesian Networks CHARLS China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study CHP China Pulmonary Health COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease DAG directed acyclic graph LACT local average treatment effects MSE mean square error MSERD MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the regression discontinuity treatment effect estimator MSESUM MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression estimates MSETWO two different MSE-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and
above the cutoff ) for the regression discontinuity treatment effect estimator
NRPS the New Rural Pension Scheme NRCMS the New Rural Cooperative Medical Scheme RDD regression discontinuity design WHO the World Health Organization
