This research work is devoted to undertaking a dynamical system representing SARS-CoV19 disease under the concept of piecewise fractional-order derivative using the Caputo concept since long-memory and short-memory terms are not well explained by ordinary fractional differential equations . It has been found that for such disruption, piecewise operators of fractional derivatives have been found useful in many cases. Therefore, we study a compartmental model of susceptible and infected individuals under the concept of piecewise derivative. We establish the existence theory of the considered model by using some Banach and Schauder fixed-point theorems. Keeping the importance of stability, a pertinent result related to the said area is also developed. The said concept of stability is based on the concept given by Ulam and Hyers. Further, to derive the numerical results, we use the Euler method to develop a numerical scheme for the considered model. Using real available data, we have presented various graphical presentations of two compartments against different fractional orders and various values of isolation parameters. The crossover behaviors in the dynamics can be clearly observed, which is explained by the piecewise operators, not the usual fractional-order derivative. 1. conclusions In this research work, we study a dynamical model that predicts COVID-19 disease infection. We have used a piecewise derivative concept to detect the multi-behavior concept and short memory effect in the dynamics of the considered system. We have proved some conditions for the existence of at least one solution and its uniqueness through a fixedpoint approach. Additionally, we have used some numerical tools to study the numerical analysis of the proposed model. Using some real data, we have presented the numerical analysis of the corresponding compartments graphically against various fractional orders. Additionally, the effect of isolation has been verified by using various values of it. The greater the isolation effect, the less will be the chance of spreading of infection. Here, it is remarkable
that using the Caputo type of fractional derivative, we bring forth a concept of “memorydependent derivative”, which is simply expressed in an integral form of a ordinary and fractional derivative with a kernel function on a slipping interval. In the same way, high-order derivatives can also be accorded with the first-order one. Comparatively, the form of kernel function for the fractional type has been kept fixed, although for the memory-dependent type it can be selected freely corresponding to the necessity of applications. So, this kind of definition is better than the fractional one for reflecting the memory effect (the instantaneous rate of change depends on the past state). The important mathematical model describing the evolution of infectious diseases is called compartmental models. The foundation was built by Kermack and Mckendrick in 1927 for the first time to study the spread of the infectious diseases in community. The fractional derivative epidemic models provide a powerful instrument for the incorporation of memory and the hereditary properties of the systems as opposed to the integer-order models, where such effects are ignored or difficult to incorporate. In addition, when fitting data, the fractional models have one more degree of freedom than the integer-order model. The proposed model is a very simple model that contains two compartments, and many other classes have been ignored. Here, we have established the qualitative analysis of the existence theory of solution and numerical interpretation. However, from present results, we concluded that the piecewise derivative can help to understand the effect of the short memory effect in the dynamical systems, which cannot be explained through an ordinary fractional-order derivative.