The following case study aims to analyze the experience of a Portuguese trans individual regarding their practice of physical exercise (PE) and sports in Portuguese gyms and sports clubs. A 30-min interview was conducted through the Zoom platform. Before the interview, four questionnaires—Satisfaction with Life Scale (SWLS), Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS), Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), and EUROHIS-QOL 8-item index—were also applied, all in their Portuguese version. The interview was digitally video recorded after consent was obtained, transcribed verbatim, and subject to thematic analysis. Findings suggest positive values for satisfaction with life and quality of life. The values of positive affect were higher than those of negative affect, and there was an absence of depressive and anxious symptomatology. In the qualitative analysis, mental health was the main motive for the practice, while locker rooms separated by gender and university life were the main barriers mentioned. Mixed changing rooms were identified as facilitators of PE practice. This study highlights the importance of developing strategies for the creation of mixed changing rooms and sports teams in order to promote a comfortable and safe practice for all individuals. 1.  For example, it may be important to consider creating specific spaces for non-binary people (e.g., gender-neutral changing rooms). It is also crucial that both gyms and sports clubs assess these perceptions of their members very carefully in order to enhance the benefits of sports and physical exercise. Namely, the
importance of focusing on the benefits for mental health is highlighted, since this was an emerging point from this study. On the other hand, this study draws attention to possible threats and barriers to the practice of sports that must be addressed. The presence of friendlier spaces for showering and changing clothes and the decrease of gender division in team sports (or the creation of mixed teams) should be strategies to be considered. In addition, improving inappropriate behaviour by PTs is important and should be a priority. In an increasingly inclusive world, where barriers are being broken down, and it is becoming easier to assume one’s gender identity, it is possible that the number of difficulties for trans individuals to participate in PE and sporting activities will increase. Thus, it is of the utmost importance to better understand the specific challenges that a transgender individual may experience when engaging in sports activities and PE. This study draws attention to research questions that should be further explored. It is important that future studies look into these issues, so that exercise and sports are safe practices for all individuals and enjoyable moments. This way, their benefits (not only physical but also psychological) will be enhanced. 6. limitations and future research Despite its contributions to research and practical implications, this study has some limitations that should be acknowledged, and that can guide future research. Firstly, as a case study, the present study only analyzed the experiences of one trans individual and cannot be generalized, which means that the results should not be generalized to the entire trans community. Secondly, this study only provided the perspective of trans men in its specific context. Finally, the inclusion of people surrounding the trans individuals (e.g., coaches, fitness and sports managers, physical education teachers, etc.) 7. conclusions After gender affirmation, there are changes in the amount and type of physical activities practiced by trans individuals. Changing rooms divided by gender and university life may be factors that hinder a comfortable and regular practice of PE and sports. The characteristics of the sports, the behavior of personal trainers, and the COVID-19 pandemic were also identified as possible barriers to practice. Furthermore, mental health was the most frequently mentioned reason to practice PE throughout this study. Besides this, it seems that the creation of mixed changing rooms and mixed sports teams would be an inclusive strategy that would facilitate the practice of PE for transgender people.