The occurrence of both melanoma and glioma was first suggested by the observation of a familial association between these conditions, which was later confirmed by the description of the melanoma–astrocytoma syndrome, an extremely rare, inherited affliction in which people have an increased risk of developing melanoma and nervous system tumors. Taking into consideration the common embryologic precursor, the neuroectoderm, it was hypothesized that this syndrome is associated with a genetic disorder. While some families with germline CDKN2A mutations are prone to develop just melanomas, others develop both melanomas and astrocytomas or even other nervous-system neoplasms. Herein, we report the case of a 63-year-old male patient with no personal or family history of malignancy who had primary melanoma followed by glioblastoma. Our case report suggests that the occurrence of both melanoma and glioblastoma is most likely not coincidental but instead linked to genetic mutations of common embryologic precursors or signaling pathways. 1. conclusions have been drawn by Braam et al. who studied 151,575 childhood cancer survivors and observed that 5.3% of all second malignant neoplasms were melanomas (212 out of 4010 patients that secondarily developed other cancers) and that the main associated risk factors were: radiotherapy, alkylating agents and anti-mitotic drugs [34]. Moreover, Pasmant et al. studied a large French family (approximately 100 members with eight individuals diagnosed with cutaneous melanoma and nine individuals affected by a variety of nervous system tumors, six of them presenting both entities) and discovered a large germline deletion, spanning over 403-kb, affecting the CDKN2B-CDKN2A gene cluster [35]. Furthermore, the authors additionally identified a large antisense noncoding RNA, termed ANRIL, whose gene overlapped the two exons of CDKN2B and had the 5′ end of its first exon located near the transcription start site of p14/ARF gene, which explained why ANRIL exhibited a stronger correlation for coordinated transcription with p14/ARF [35]. The authors hypothesized that in normal tissues noncoding RNAs may act as gene transcription regulators through different possible mechanisms, such as RNA interference, gene cosuppression, and DNA demethylation (i.e., ANRIL could regulate p14/ARF, as well as p15/CDKN2B and p16/CDKN2A expression), thus explaining why large deletions including the ANRIL gene could further affect tumor suppressor gene transcripts [35,36]. 5. conclusions Though exceptionally, there are reports in the literature on the occurrence of both melanoma and glioblastoma, either in the same patient or in the same family. The genetic basis of these associations has neuroectodermal origins and was clarified by studies that detected depletion in genetic loci encoding essential tumor suppressor genes [37]. This association is now officially known as the familial melanoma–astrocytoma syndrome [37]. Even though secondary glioblastomas are less frequent than primary ones, establishing the correct nature of the tumor and its genetic signature has an important prognostic value and it enables the prescription of targeted therapies, if these are available. Studies show that survival rates from glioblastoma are poor, with a median survival of only three months in untreated patients [38]. Only a few patients survive two and a half years, and fewer than 5% survive five years following a glioblastoma diagnosis [39]. Despite current studies, an evident syndrome describing the association between melanoma and glioblastoma has yet to be determined. From our point of view, the presented case report describes a patient with a history of stage IIB malignant melanoma and primary glioblastoma. This unique case report illustrates both histologic and genetic diversity and raises awareness regarding the sporadic co-occurrence of these two medical entities.