The periosteum is a thin layer of connective tissue covering bone. It is an essential component for bone development and fracture healing. There has been considerable research exploring the application of the periosteum in bone regeneration since the 19th century. An increasing number of studies are focusing on periosteal progenitor cells found within the periosteum and the use of hydrogels as scaffold materials for periosteum engineering and guided bone development. Here, we provide an overview of the research investigating the use of the periosteum for bone repair, with consideration given to the anatomy and function of the periosteum, the importance of the cambium layer, the culture of periosteal progenitor cells, periosteum-induced ossification, periosteal perfusion, periosteum engineering, scaffold vascularization, and hydrogel-based synthetic periostea. 1. conclusion echoed the viewpoint of Kolodny (1923), who emphasized that many studies did not differentiate between a young periosteum (at a reactive stage) and an old periosteum (at latent stage) and that with appropriate stimulation, periostea procured from adult animals should display an osteogenic potency equivalent to periostea collected from
Gels 2023, 9, 768 4 of 18
young animals [29]. In 1930, Burman and Umansky transplanted free periosteal grafts harvested from the tibias of young rabbits into the tendons of the tibialis anterior muscles. The research demonstrated new bone growth in the presence of the cambium layer and the opposite when the cambium layer was absent [26]. Schepelmann further studied the effect of vascularization, comparing periostea transplanted into either highly vascular organs (the liver, spleen, ovaries, etc.) or less vascular organs (the stomach or bowel). Better ossification was observed in the former group, showcasing the importance of blood supply [26]. To clarify the periosteum’s role in ossification, in his 1952 paper, Urist suggests that “the nineteenth-century controversy about the osteogenic potency of periosteum arose because it was not generally recognized that the negative results occurred only in transplants from adult or old animals” [30]. Based on the above-mentioned studies, we note that there were several key factors determining the ossification efficacy of the periosteum. Among them, age, vascularization, and the integrity of the periosteal cambium layer should be highlighted and carefully considered for experimental planning. 4. periosteum-induced intramembranous and endochondral ossification Bone fracture healing can be categorized into two groups: stabilized fracture healing and non-stabilized fracture healing [19,31]. In the former group, periosteal cells are minimally stimulated. If there is no gap between two fracture ends, a repair process called contact healing will take place wherein oriented lamellar bone is produced by osteoprogenitor cells derived from the Haversian system within the cortex. When the fracture gap is small, lamellar bone forms first and is subsequently remodeled to the correct orientation. When the fracture gap is wide, woven bone is generated, followed by its conversion into lamellar bone [18]. In non-stabilized fracture healing, periosteal cells respond to mechanical stimuli to induce bone healing through several stages [18]. Following bone fracture, the hematoma plays a significant role in bone repair by not only providing a “recovery medium” but also by releasing cytokines to recruit osteogenic stem cells from various sources, including the periosteum, bone marrow, and endosteum [20]. In the peripheral zones of the fracture where vascularization is maximal, the outer fibrous layer of the periosteum acts as a mechanical stabilizer, and intramembranous ossification occurs via the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells derived from the periosteum into osteoblasts. The differentiated osteoblasts secrete osteoid, which calcifies to form bone tissue [19,31]. However, in the center of the fracture site, where the vascularization is poor, progenitor cells from the cambium layer of the periosteum aggregate in the hematoma and differentiate into chondrocytes that subsequently form cartilage (soft callus) to bridge the fracture. These cartilaginous tissues then mineralize (hard callus) to form bone. This repair mechanism is called endochondral ossification [18,19,31]. Therefore, the periosteum plays a major role in fracture healing by providing osteochondrogenic progenitor cells. A fracture repaired via endochondral ossification differs from intramembranous ossification in that it involves an intermediate stage in which cartilage is formed and then ossified [12]. Three-dimensional bioprinting was used to prepare an engineered artificial periosteum for bone defect repair (Created with BioRender.com). A yet-unresolved challenge is the supply of nutrients to complex tissue-engineered constructs that are designed to be implanted in vivo to replace critical-sized bone defects. Whilst diffusion is feasible for thin artificial periostea, it is insufficient when combined with cellular bone scaffolds that are designed for hostile environments that have failed to repair via endogenous mechanisms. Therefore, the vascularization of artificial periostea needs to be addressed. One effective approach was to differentiate rat-bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells to induce endothelial-like cells. The obtained cells were combined with a cell sheet of un-differentiated MSCs. This sheet was used as an artificial fibrous layer. Meanwhile, another cell sheet was produced by differentiating the MSCs into osteogenic cells to form an artificial cambium layer. Both layers were assembled together to bio-mimic a natural periosteum, and the assembly was then wrapped around a porous β-tricalcium phosphate scaffold to facilitate vascularization [145]. In another approach, a decellularized periosteum was utilized as a template to create a pseudo-periosteum based on collagen in which the stem cells and endothelial cells were co-cultured to stimulate both osteogenesis and angiogenesis. The publication emphasizes the role of “cross-talk” between osteoblasts and endothelial cells for bone regeneration [146]. 10. summary and future direc ions The periosteum plays essential roles in bone development and fracture healing. The human application of the periosteum for bone regeneration began a few centuries ago. Despite controversy, several scholars in the 19th and early 20th centuries emphasized the critical roles of the cambium layers, age, vascularization, and harvesting techniques. The perioste m contributes to both i tramembranous and endochondral ossifications during bone fracture heali g which, in turn, depends on sta ilization and the distance to the fracture site. The cambium layer acts s a res rv ir of osteogenic progenitor cells that are stimulated to differentia e by BMP-2 and skeletal stem cells, which have common mesenchymal origins with BMSCs. The cambium layer is thin, reduc s with age, and is adherent to the cortical bone, making surgical harvest ng c allenging. The progenitor cells of the cambium cells
Gels 2023, 9, 768 12 of 18
can be isolated and expanded from a harvested periosteum via either explant culture or enzymatic digestion, and classical markers used for the identification of MSCs can also be used to characterize the cambium progenitor cells as distinct from periosteal fibroblasts. An ex vivo perfusion bioreactor system demonstrated the feasibility of preserving the cellular viability of a harvested periosteum. The preserved periosteum may have the potential for use in future scaffold fabrication and vascularization. Periosteum engineering or the creation of artificial periostea using hydrogel scaffolds is a growing and promising field. Osteogenic cells and molecules are encapsulated into single-layered or bi-layered hydrogel membrane scaffolds to mimic a natural periosteum. 3-D printing techniques can be applied to manufacture biomimetic artificial periostea with complex microstructures, with one key challenge being the vascularization of the constructs.