The purpose of this study was to monitor and compare the growth and productivity of maize/beans sole and inter-cropping systems under conventional (CON) and in-field rainwater harvesting (IRWH) tillage practices. During the typical drought conditions of the 2018/19 growing season, seven homestead gardens of smallholder farmers (four in Paradys and three in Morago villages) in the Thaba Nchu rural communities of South Africa were selected for on-farm demonstration trials. Two tillage systems CON and IRWH as the main plot and three cropping systems as sub-treatment (sole maize and beans and intercropping) were used to measure crop growth and productivity parameters. The results showed that IRWH tillage had significantly higher above-ground dry matter for both sole maize (29%) and intercropped maize (27%) compared to CON treatments. The grain yield under both tillage systems showed that IRWH-Sole >> IRWH-Ic >> CON-Sole >> CON-Ic, with values ranging from 878.2 kg ha−1 to 618 kg ha−1 (p ≤ 0.05). The low harvest index values (0.21–0.38) could have been due to the effect of the drought during the growing season. The results of precipitation use efficiency (PUE) showed that the IRWH tillage was more effective at converting rainwater into maize biomass and grain yield compared to CON tillage. However, the different cropping systems did not show a consistent trend in PUE. During the growing season, the PUE for AGDM varied for different tillage and cropping system treatments in Morago and Paradys. For maize, it ranged between 10.01–6.07 and 9.93–7.67 kg ha−1, while for beans, it ranged between 7.36–3.95 and 7.07–3.89 kg ha−1 mm−1. The PUE for grain yield showed similar trends with the significantly highest values of PUE under IRWH tillage systems for the Morago sites, but there were no significant differences at the Paradys site in both tillage and cropping systems. There is a critical need, therefore, to devise alternative techniques to promote an increase in smallholders’ productivity based on an improved ability to capture and use resources more efficiently. 1. conclusions. This study hypothesized whether the practices of IRWH tillage with intercropping systems increase productivity and minimize risks compared to solely growing crops in CON tillage in semiarid areas of South Africa. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to monitor and compare the growth and productivity of maize/beans sole- and inter-cropping systems under CON and IRWH tillage practices. 5. conclusions This study aimed to test whether IRWH tillage with intercropping system increases productivity and minimizes risk compared to solely growing crops in CON tillage in semiarid areas of South Africa. The drought conditions of the 2018/19 growing season provided an opportunity to demonstrate the effect of alternative management practices. The results showed that IRWH tillage had a significantly higher above-ground dry matter for both sole maize and intercropped maize compared to CON treatments. The grain yield under IRWH tillage was also higher than under CON tillage. The precipitation use efficiency (PUE) results indicate that the IRWH tillage was better at converting rainwater into maize biomass and grain yield compared to CON. This study revealed that farmers in semi-arid areas seek alternative techniques to improve water productivity and efficient use of resources. The use of idle backyard homestead gardens with water harvesting techniques could help alleviate pressure on less productive and environmentally fragile agroecosystems. IRWH and intercropping management practices show great potential for increasing nutrition and possibly income in rural communities where hunger and malnutrition are frequent. Future efforts toward crop improvement, such as manure application and introducing green mulch
Plants 2023, 12, 3027 17 of 19
along with optimal management practices, could lead to higher productivity in the context of a changing climate.