Motivation: Relation extraction (RE) is a crucial process to deal with the amount of text published daily, e.g. to find missing associations in a database. RE is a text mining task for which the state-of-the-art approaches use bidirectional encoders, namely, BERT. However, state-of-the-art performance may be limited by the lack of efficient external knowledge injection approaches, with a larger impact in the biomedical area given the widespread usage and high quality of biomedical ontologies. This knowledge can propel these systems forward by aiding them in predicting more explainable biomedical associations. With this in mind, we developed K-RET, a novel, knowledgeable biomedical RE system that, for the first time, injects knowledge by handling different types of associations, multiple sources and where to apply it, and multi-token entities.  We determined experimentally for the DDI Corpus the multi-token approach to be more thorough, which can be explained by those entities constituting the majority of biomedical entities described in the datasets used for testing. 5 conclusion This article proposed a new biomedical RE system, K-RET, that incorporates knowledge in the form of ontologies into BERT-based systems to enrich and complement the data used for training. KRET is a flexible system that can handle different associations, integrate knowledge from multiple sources, define where to apply the knowledge, and deal with multi-token entities. We used three independent and open-access RE datasets to test our system concerning different types of biomedical entities with different characteristics (i.e. label distribution). Allied with the three datasets, we used four knowledge bases to inject knowledge according to the type of entities involved in the candidate relations. The best-performing dataset was the DDI Corpus allied with the ChEBI knowledge base, with significant average improvements compared with the baseline in the order of 7.60% and 8.28% for F-measure and accuracy, respectively. For the BC5CDR Corpus, we also had modest improvements (an average of 1.39% and 1.35% for F-measure and accuracy), even though we did not find these results significant. Differently, for the PGR-crowd Corpus, there was no significant change in performance from the addition of knowledge. Thus, we concluded that the label distribution and relevant entity density within the training data significantly affect how our system performs. Nevertheless, we successfully demonstrated the power of adding external knowledge to training data and how to accommodate it to different domain data. In a nutshell, the K-RET system successfully added contextual knowledge, more than one knowledge source, and knowledge to multi-token entities.