conclusions, limitations)
• the intervention, including the knowledge organizing systems [67] (theories, frameworks, models) underpinning the approach to shared decision making • the features described in our conceptual framework (see Fig. 1) • study authors’ explanations of facilitators and/or barriers, outputs, and outcomes. data synthesis One member of the team (JJ) led the conduct of framework synthesis with three other authors (SO, KF, BH) and the oversight (review processes, discuss, provide guidance) of the team, by 1) becoming familiar with the data, 2) applying the conceptual framework to abstracted data, 3) tabulating and interpreting the findings [68]. Data that did not correspond to the conceptual framework were incorporated as emergent themes. The findings were reflected upon, and discussed among team members  to confirm similarities and differences within the data, and to determine associations between themes [69]. Our team engaged in reflection on the objectives of our review to guide interpretations in the conduct of the synthesis. results  search results and characteristics The search identified a total of 5068 studies of which we included nine studies, reported in 10 publications (Supplementary file 5). The studies were conducted in the United States (n = 4), Canada (n = 3), New Zealand (n = 1) and Australia (n = 1). The studies were focused on the development and/or evaluation of shared decision making interventions in the areas of Depression (n = 1), Cancer screening (n = 1), Child welfare (n = 2), Any health decision (n = 1), Cancer care (n = 1), Intimate partner violence (n = 1), Tobacco use (n = 1), and Arthritis (n = 1). Most of the studies were a qualitative design (n = 8) and reported some form of Indigenous and academic research partnership (n = 7). The characteristics of included studies are listed in Table 1. The descriptions of interventions to support the shared decision making process ranged from online/electronic, paper-based, and paper-based plus training, to models of practice to facilitate decision making. The providers of the shared decision making interventions included health care providers, trained decision coaches, coordinators or agency personnel, trained youth and project staff, or trained researchers who were testing the intervention with the intent for use by health care providers. Two interventions were designed to be used without provider involvement. The potential limitations of this review include poor indexing of studies in databases, a lack of tested protocols for conducting systematic reviews in Indigenous health, and the potential for inclusion of more grey literature. In response, given the poor indexing of studies in electronic databases, it is possible that some studies were missed; however, there is transparency in the extensive search strategy. The review is limited by the reality that currently most health research is written, reviewed, and published by non-Indigenous scholars and journals in academic systems that are founded in colonial systems. The important contributions of Indigenous scholars and knowledge systems to health research contexts will become more visible as the capacity for journals to support publication of health research that is equityoriented improves and with the increasing numbers of Indigenous researchers who extend thinking about how to conduct health research. Our review is not intended as an effectiveness review and involves framework synthesis that is unlikely to substantially change with the inclusion of new evidence [100]; additionally, no new studies were located with the grey literature search. We anticipate using the findings from this review to build grey literature search strategies in another, future review. The strengths of our review include: 1) the oversight and governance of Indigenous team members to embed Indigenous knowledges and practices in our review processes; 2) the use of a conceptual framework to organize concepts important to shared decision making with Indigenous Peoples; 3) a comprehensive search strategy that was developed with an academic librarian, the use of two independent reviewers at each screening stage, and; 4) Indigenous critical appraisal tools to identify the strengths and relevance of included studies’ contributions to shared decision making and Indigenous selfdetermination. Additionally, the use of the ENTREQ and PRISMA-Equity guidelines in this review provide a standardized approach to reporting and contributes to building evidence on best standards for systematic reviews supporting health equity [40, 41]. conclusions Health care systems and settings have been identified as places where racism and negative histories exist, with policies that structure routines and behaviour that are not inclusive [80, 101]. While there are examples of health care settings that have been designed to provide culturally appropriate care that include care for Indigenous Peoples [102–104], there are limited descriptions of interventions to support Indigenous Peoples to participate in health decision making. Shared decision making tools and approaches are complex interventions that are developed to facilitate shared decision making process with people who span health systems, from patients and families to policy makers [105]. Our review provides examples of how to develop and evaluate shared decision making interventions with Indigenous Peoples. It extends thinking beyond Westernoriented conceptions of shared decision making interventions. Overall, Indigenous-oriented studies sought to make health care systems more amenable to shared decision making for Indigenous Peoples, while Western-oriented studies distanced shared decision making from health care settings. Our findings demonstrate that it is possible to do high quality research to develop and evaluate shared decision making interventions with potential to  support Indigenous Peoples to participate in their health decisions. 