Integrity-linked issues have become increasingly serious and attracted considerable attention regarding the sustainability of live streaming; therefore, live streaming anchors and suppliers have become increasingly concerned about their ongoing marketing. Moreover, streaming platforms are also beginning to focus on sustainable development. Determining how live streaming anchor behavior, supplier behavior, and streaming platform strategic decision affect live streaming is essential for achieving the healthy and sustainable development of live streaming ecosystems. However, the game among live streaming anchor behavior, supplier behavior, and streaming platform strategic decisions, which the live streaming ecosystem strongly depends on, has attracted little attention. This study constructed a game model of value co-creation evolution in live streaming ecosystems, with the live streaming anchors, suppliers, and streaming platforms as the main subject. The evolutionary stable strategies of the game were analyzed, and the influence of typical factors on the system was discussed. The results showed that the best evolutionary stability strategy is that live streaming anchors and suppliers choose honesty, and streaming platforms have strict regulation, which is the optimal strategic objective for value co-creation. The appropriate rewards and punishments inherent in a streaming platform can help regulate the behavior of the live streaming anchor and supplier; specifically, great rewards and severe punishments of the streaming platform can be applied to incentivize the honest behavior of the live streaming anchor and supplier. This study provides insights for designing appropriate policies for live streaming platforms to promote sustainable development. 1. conclusions and policy implications This study considered people’s limited capacity to be rational and built a tripartite evolutionary game model with the live streaming anchor, the supplier, and the live streaming platform. In addition, this paper analyzed the evolutionary stabilization strategies and investigated how the live streaming platform can control the violations existing in live streaming through a reasonable policy strategy to reduce the problems of false promotion and false traffic, purify the environment of live streaming, maintain the possibility of purifying the live webcast environment, maintain social credit, and protect the legal rights of citizens. The authenticity and validity of the research content were verified using numerical simulation analysis. The following results were obtained:
1. The difference in the initial probability had no effect on the stabilization strategy of the sys-
tem but rather only affected the time at which the system became stable. When live streaming platforms are strictly regulated, live streaming anchors and suppliers will be attracted to
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291453 September 22, 2023 21 / 26
honesty driven by prospective profits, resulting in honesty behaviors being stable in the market. ESS is only influenced by the values of parameters that satisfy the stability conditions. The larger the initial value is, the faster the evolutionary trajectory reaches the ESS (1,1,1). 2. The strength of the reward and punishment can affect the size of the co-creation value. Live
streaming platform behavior will appear shocking when the strength of the reward is too large, thus hindering the importance of the co-creation effect of the ecological system of the live streaming platform. As the incentive strength rises from 0.3 to 0.6, the time required for live streaming anchors and suppliers to reach a stable strategy is shortened and the rate increases; however, the strategy of the live streaming platforms adjusts more slowly and takes longer to stabilize. This may be related to the negative impact of incentive strength on live streaming platform revenue. However, the live streaming platform side needs to be brave enough to shoulder the social responsibility in its revenue and cultivate a good live streaming ecology. When the incentive reaches 0.8, the live streaming anchor still chooses the integrity strategy, but the strategy choices of the supplier and the live streaming platform adopt an oscillation phenomenon. The system cannot reach a stable state, and the value probability of co-destruction increases. Moreover, as the penalties increase, live streaming anchors and suppliers will choose integrity strategies more quickly, and the supplier is relatively sensitive to the punishment intensity. 3. An increase in the revenue distribution coefficient has a positive effect on the value co-crea-
tion of the ecological system of the live streaming platform. The live streaming anchor is relatively the least sensitive to changes in distribution coefficients. The study of evolutionary game in terms of value co-creation in the ecosystem of live
streaming platforms provides the following suggestions. 1. Establish a scientific reward and punishment mechanism, reasonably allocate the network
externality gain coefficient, and promote value co-creation. Although an increase in reward and punishment strengths can improve the evolutionary efficiency of the live streaming anchor and the supplier tending to an honesty strategy and reduce the probability of collusion events, when the reward strength is too high, the live streaming platform cost burden is too heavy. Such conditions prevent the live streaming platform from operating sustainably and benignly, leading to unstable strategic choices for each subject. At the same time, excessively high penalties will require the live streaming platform to pay more human and financial resources, which will also limit the governance efficiency of the live streaming platform. Moreover, increasing the revenue allocation coefficient of the network externality will also promote the stability of the positive strategies of each subject. When the revenue allocation coefficient is too small, the live streaming platform will consider a negative regulatory strategy because of the pursuit of an increase in user scale and traffic. Therefore, the live streaming platform needs to grasp the rewards and punishments further, build a scientific and reasonable reward and punishment system, improve the revenue distribution system based on traffic regulation and evaluation mechanisms, motivate the live streaming anchor to perform an excellent job by actively performing their duties to provide better live streaming content and product services, thus obtaining traffic support and avoiding unfair competition and monopoly phenomena using punishment to maintain the sustainable of the live streaming ecosystem. 2. Building a value co-creation governance system that regulates the behavior of the live
streaming anchor. The live streaming anchor is a crucial subject in the ecological system of
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291453 September 22, 2023 22 / 26
the live streaming platform. The live streaming platform should appropriately strengthen punishments, optimize punishment measures, and establish a credit scoring system for the live streaming anchor. In the long run, for healthy and sustainable development of the live streaming ecosystem, the live streaming platform should improve the entry threshold for the live streaming anchor and strengthen the pre-broadcast audit mechanism to enhance implementing incentives. 3. Establish a supplier blocklist system and withdrawal mechanism. To establish a supplier
qualification verification mechanism, name registration and qualification audits of suppliers must be accurate, industry associations must be relevant, and administrative departments must share or exchange information related to the administrative penalties of suppliers. The supplier information changes should be updated promptly and a blocklist system and withdrawal mechanism of the supplier must be established. In the event of violations of laws and regulations or live streaming platform rules and other circumstances, warning reminders are required for the deadline for rectification and other measures. The accounts of suppliers who commit severe violations of the law or have destructive social impacts should be placed on the blocklist and canceled if necessary. 4. Strengthen the social responsibility of the live streaming platform, clarify the leadership
responsibility of ecosystem value co-creation governance, and reduce the risk of value codestruction. The strategy choice of the live streaming platform side has a crucial influence on the behavior of the anchor and the supplier. Although when the live streaming platform chooses to supervise strictly to a certain extent, which will increase the supervision cost and the risk of decreasing user scale and user traffic, its strategy choice of strict supervision can guide live streaming anchors toward adopting ethical behaviors and give up behaviors that will hinder value co-creation, such as false promotion. This strategy can guide and encourage suppliers to give up substandard and dishonest behaviors. Therefore, the live streaming platform itself should take the initiative to assume social responsibility, play the leading role, strengthen public opinion against false promotion, enhance user education, guide the live streaming anchor and the supplier to use resources rationally and interact efficiently, catalyze the aggregation of all subjects in the live streaming platform to face the problems together, and stimulate bilateral users in the live streaming platform to fulfill their responsibilities. There are three key parameters in this problem, including the strength of the reward and punishment and the network externality benefit distribution. The live streaming anchors, suppliers, and live streaming platforms will make different strategic choices based on parameter changes. Thus, by adjusting these parameters, value co-creation can be achieved in the live streaming ecosystem. These results can also inform government agencies or live streaming platforms to consider these three key parameters when designing policies/business models. This study has certain limitations: (1) The subjects involved were only the tripartite
groups of the live streaming anchors, suppliers, and live streaming platform; however, consumers also influence the live streaming ecosystem during the live streaming process. 