Introduction: Socioeconomic factors have been recognized by the WHO as determinants of health, and it is important to consider these factors in decision making to curb existing inequality in vaccination for SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19. Objective: We aimed to determine whether there is a correlation between socioeconomic factors and vaccination worldwide and measure inequality. Method: A study of secondary sources was carried out to assess inequality in vaccination against COVID-19 worldwide and its association with socioeconomic factors. For this assessment, 169 countries were chosen from January 2020 to March 2022 using LibreOffice and JASP 0.16.1.10. Several mathematical models and statistical tests were used, including a normality test, an analysis of frequencies and proportions, a Kruskal–Wallis test, Spearman’s correlations, a Lorenz curve, a Concentration Index, and a slope. Results: Correlations were found between socioeconomic factors and vaccination with one, two, and three doses. As the GDP showed correlations of 0.71 for one dose and 0.82 for three doses, we found that the greater the competitiveness of the countries, the higher the percentage of vaccinated individuals in their populations. According to the Concentration Index, there was greater inequality in vaccination with regard to receiving a higher number of doses, as reflected in the life expectancy indices of 0.16–0.19 and 0.50. The continent with the highest degree of inequality was Africa, and the continent with the lowest degree was America. South Americans were vaccinated with two doses at a rate of 6.19%/month, which was 4.3 times faster than Africans, with 72% of the population being vaccinated in South America, compared to only 16% in Africa. Conclusion: There is inequality in vaccination against COVID-19 with one, two, and three doses, which is associated with socioeconomic factors. 1. conclusions There was inequality in vaccination with one, two, and three doses against COVID-19, and this was associated with socioeconomic indicators; thus, the countries with the highest number of cases and deaths had unfavorable indicators, as well an insufficient level of vaccination. The ICG had a positive correlation with vaccination, unlike the IFN, which had a negative correlation. Inequality, measured using the Lorenz curve, was higher in Africa, followed by Europe, Asia/Oceania, and finally, North and South America, increasing as number of vaccine dose increased; regarding the third dose, its uptake was very low, with the lowest value occurring in Africa. The rate of vaccination was slow in the first months, with South America being the region that vaccinated the most people with the first dose, followed by Asia, North America, Europe, Oceania, and Africa. This region vaccinated a lower percentage of its population with the second and third doses. Recommendations
We recommend continuing to use socioeconomic variables to measure inequalities in vaccination that may exist in each country.