The transportation industry is a significant contributor to greenhouse gas emissions, particularly carbon dioxide. This study broadens the literature on environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) by assessing Pakistan’s carbon dioxide emissions in the transport sector taking into account the impact of non-renewable energy, urbanization, and economic growth for the period of 1995–2018 using the novel QARDL model. Moreover, the outcomes of the study make a momentous benefaction to the literature by focusing a sector that contributes substantially to pollution in Pakistan. Specifically, the study finds that the EKC curve is confirmed for Pakistan’s transportation sector in moderate to higher quantiles. Urbanization and non-renewable energy are also two other vital ingredients that dramatically aggravate the destruction of the environment. Except for the lowest (0.05th–10th) and highest (90th–95th) quantiles, urbanization affects transport-based carbon pollution positively. The study concludes by proposing some policy interventions for Pakistan.But it is evident that a statistically significant short-term impact of GDP and GDP2 on emissions. In the short run, previous and current changes in GDP and also GDP2 do not impact transport-based CO2, significantly. For URB, past and current changes in URB significantly and positively affect the past and current variations in transport-based CO2 at quantiles ranging from 50th to 0.80th. Moreover, the past and current changes in NREN significantly and positively affect the variations in emissions at moderate to highest quantiles ranging from 30th to 90th. Overall, the short-term dynamics indicate that the impacts of URB and NREN on emissions are more pronounced in the short run than in the long run. This may be because the effects of urbanization and energy use on emissions are more immediate in the short term, while the transition to cleaner technologies takes time to have an impact on emissions. The findings also suggest that the impact of economic growth on emissions is more long-term in nature, and may be influenced by factors such as technology innovation and policy measures that promote sustainability. These results highlight the importance of considering the dynamic nature of the relationship between these variables and transport-based carbon emissions in Pakistan. The findings suggest that policy interventions aimed at promoting sustainable urbanization and transitioning to renewable energy sources may have a more pronounced impact in the short run, while in the long run, economic growth may play a larger role in driving emissions. The varying effects across quantiles for the variables also are supported by the Wald test results in Table 4. The test statistics of Wald indicate that the null hypothesis of the parameter of constancy of the speed adjustment parameter is rejected. The test statistics also show the long-run
asymmetric relationships of transport-based carbon emission with GDP, GDP2, URB, and NREN in Pakistan. Therefore, based on these findings, it can be said that the cointegrating parameter between GDP, GDP2, URB and NREN, and TCO2 is dynamic. For the short-run parameters, the Wald test statistics fail to reject the null hypothesis of the parameter constancy for all variables, except NREN. In addition, the shortterm cumulative impact of URB and NREN is significant. conclusion and policy recommendations Our study contributes to the literature by analyzing the impact of non-renewable energy, urbanization, and economic growth on transport-based carbon emissions in Pakistan within the EKC framework. Our findings indicate that these factors have a quantile-dependent long-run and short-run relationship with transport-based carbon emissions, with economic growth following an inverted U-shaped relationship. Furthermore, we found that the environmental damage caused by non-renewable energy consumption is less at the lower quantile and high at the upper quantile level, highlighting the importance of switching to renewable energy in transportation. The implications of our study for policymakers are clear. We suggest that growth-oriented policies are necessary to validate the EKC hypothesis and that policymakers in Pakistan should target development and growth-related policies without fear of environmental degradation. We also recommend re-arranging urban planning priorities to minimize transport-based environmental pollution, such as improving the public transport system and encouraging high-rise building culture. Dissemination of sustainable alternative fuel use and infrastructure within the scope of green transformation are important steps for decarbonization, and we suggest that the government give green finance to convert current vehicles to renewable energy. In addition, we recommend the introduction of a comprehensive transportation system with a special focus on vehicle fitness monitoring to reduce transport-based carbon emissions. Financial penalties should be used to discourage out-of-order vehicles that are emitting smoke. Energy efficiency in the transport sector and optimization of vehicle speed can also contribute to reducing emissions. The dissemination of vehicles based on fuel economy and support of tax incentives can make a significant difference. Finally, we emphasize the importance of the public transport system in overcoming the environmental issues caused by the transport sector and suggest that the government encourage the public and private sectors to invest in and provide a high-quality public transport system to the citizens.