conclusion The available health economic evidence suggests that single-agent AC is cost-effective compared to no AC for both stage II and stage III CC, that oral AC is cost-effective compared to intravenous AC for stage III CC, that oxaliplatin-based AC is cost-effective for stage III CC, and that 3-month CAPOX is cost-effective compared to 6-months for high-risk stage II and low-risk stage III CC. The early evidence also suggests that biomarker-driven approaches to refine patient treatment selection for AC for stage II CC may be cost-effective compared to current standard of care, though more robust randomised clinical and economic evidence is warranted. Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12962- 023- 00422-2. Additional file 1. Supplementary Material 1. Acknowledgements Not applicable. Author contributions The research design, including conceptualization, was developed as a combined effort of all authors. The data curation (i.e. literature search) and formal analysis was performed by YHT in close co-operation with and under the supervision of KD. All authors contribute to the interpretation and discussion of the results. The first draft of the manuscript was written by YHT and all authors commented on previous version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Funding No funding was received for performing this study. Availability of data and materials The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests An economic evaluation authored by YHT with co-authors KD, JT, PG and MIJ was included in the systematic analysis. There are no other actual or potential conflict of interest including any financial, personal or other relationships with other people or organizations within that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work. Received: 20 July 2022 Accepted: 23 January 2023
