The paper aims at the question of using Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities as a marketing tool from the customers’ perspective in the Slovak food market. Five research questions and hypotheses were set to reach the given aim. The research was based on a questionnaire survey with 1254 respondents. The frequency and contingency tables were used to evaluate the obtained data, one sample proportion Z test, Pearson Chi-square test, and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. Based on the results, although the customers are familiar with CSR, many respondents need to learn more about these activities. CSR activities must be more actively applied and communicated by the food companies. In most cases, Slovak customers perceive the sustainability of food companies and their CSR activities as a marketing communication tool that can build a positive image of the company. At the threshold of the 3rd millennium, CSR is also connected with rationality and irrationality in creating preferences in consumer shopping behavior. While the way that food is produced can be changed through regulation, the communication of CSR and sustainability activities are major drivers for the development of food companies. Trustworthiness is one of the key factors, and customers play a key role in this direction. The solved issue has a huge impact on the success of the food companies in the market, and, therefore, it would be suitable to pay attention to this issue and conduct similar research in other E.U. countries and on their food companies. 1. conclusions The public expects food companies to show CSR activities in all three pillars of CSR—people, planet, and profit. On the threshold of the 3rd millennium, CSR is strongly connected with rationality and irrationality in creating preferences in consumer shopping behavior. Fulfilling the requirements and ideas of customers is important for the company to be able to present the given activities so that they appear trustworthy correctly. Trustworthiness is one of the key factors in this direction for customers and their consumer behavior, which the CSR activities of food companies can influence. Based on the chosen issue, we conducted a questionnaire survey focused on CSR activities as a marketing tool in the food market, aiming at CSR activities and marketing communication in the conditions of food businesses in Slovakia. Any other researcher in Slovakia still needs to carry out research with such a focus. The survey results with 1254 participating respondents showed that, although they are familiar with the concept of CSR, a large percentage of respondents either need to learn these activities or pay more attention to them. This may be because some CSR activities need to be actively applied and communicated by food companies. Based on our conducted research, customers perceive the CSR activities of food companies in most cases as a marketing communication tool that builds the company’s good name and image. However, our research also has some limitations. We focused on respondents from Slovakia and the perception of food companies’ CSR activities in the Slovak Republic’s territory. We are also aware that CSR is rapidly developing, and the issue described in the submitted contribution may continue to develop and change. Based on this, new possibilities and trends for future research will be developed.