The COVID-19 pandemic has generated a new trend in people’s behavior. It was initially the contact economy, where individuals had to be physically present, whereas now the economy has become contactless (Manimuthu, Dharshini, Zografopoulos, Priyan & Konstantinou, 2021). This behavior requires that relevant stakeholders should develop an appropriate technology, such as digital payments, which is necessary for the industrial era 4.0 (Brunkhorst, 2020; Trütsch, 2020; Faturohman, Farras Ar Rasyid, Rahadi, Darmansyah & Afgani 2021). Through technology, all trade transactions, public services, tourism and financial services are encouraged to be carried out without any face-to-face contact (Lee & Review paper UDC: UDC: 336.71:004.738.5(594) doi:10.5937/ekonhor2301085S conclusions are based upon the six hypotheses proposed in this study reading that performance expectancy, the social influence, and the facilitating condition have a positive and significant impact on the behavioral use of noncash payment transactions of taxes and levies in North Sumatra Province. On the other hand, effort expectancy has no significant impact on the cashless transactions of tax and levy payments in the North Sumatra Province, which is because the respondents’ perceptions of the cashless payment system for taxes and levies in North Sumatra Province are still negative. Overall, the results of the hypotheses testing are positive and significant to be implemented as the policy development related to ERPT by smart governance. The problems the authorities were faced with when the ERPT implementation in North Sumatra Province is concerned were the user’s interest, the banking infrastructure, HR competence and regional government commitment, and the IT infrastructure. There is still a lack of information about and education in ERPT, particularly so for the payment of taxes and levies in a noncash regime. The public’s trust in the capacity of the banking and IT infrastructures to support transactions for the cashless payment of taxes and levies is still lacking, and the imbalance in the quality of the network in each region is a limiting factor to the implementation of ERPT in North Sumatra Province. In order to increase the public acceptance of noncash transactions, the Government needs to increase promotion, such as education in and socialization with respect to the payment of taxes and levies through digital channels by making educational videos or publications through social media. Education and technical guidance to improve the competence of the local government’s human resources is needed so as to provide smoothness in the development of ERPT. In addition to said, the equitable availability of electricity and telecommunications networks and IT devices in all districts/cities, especially in rural/remote areas, improving the server quality and security using blockchain technology, developing a single database and the regional government financial dashboard and local tax applications play an important role in encouraging digitization in North Sumatra Province. The scope of this study is limited to North Sumatra Province as one of Indonesia’s urban areas managed by means of smart governance. However, this research accommodates at least 50 samples in each district, so the respondent can capture the implementation of cashless society and the electronification payment system in this area.