conclusions reflect the situation in EU countries. A selected set of states always considers tourism in the BE concept at least partially. More detailed conclusions could be drawn if we considered all EU states. However, this selection was sufficient for our analysis, which consists in finding out whether tourism appears in BE strategies. Another possibility for the development of research could be to grasp tourism in the concept of BE for the whole world. For an overview, in Table 4 below we present selected countries from individual continents with their own BE strategy. Countries such as Canada, South Africa, Japan, and India have their own BE strategy, but tourism is not included at all. Thailand, Australia, Columbia, and Costa Rica mention tourism in the concept, and often very significant. Iceland, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands have a common BE strategy. In their strategy, tourism is an essential pillar of BE development. This information suggests that different concepts of tourism in non-EU countries can be further explored across other continents. Sustainability should be the main concept which is considered with the concept of BE. Prioritizing the economic pillar usually causes overloading of land use, an increase in the volume of waste, and transport problems–e.g. excessive development of tourist areas can lead to their deterioration and subsequent collapse. Prioritizing the social pillar can jeopardize competitiveness if there is fierce economic competition between regions. The prioritization of environmental aspects, e.g. excessively protective approach to the territory, can cause economic hardship, associated with depopulation and stagnation of the region (Huttmanova and Valentiny, 2019). In the short term, it is possible to take operational measures, prioritizing any of the factors for solving urgent economic, social, or ecological
FIGURE 2 Graphic representation of the relationship between BE-based tourism and other forms of tourism from the point of view of sustainability pillars in definitions of special tourism concepts (graphic processing by the authors). Frontiers in Environmental Science frontiersin.org09
problems. But it is always necessary to consider the long-term consequences of these measures and find an appropriate balance. Many countries experienced local overtourism before the COVID19 pandemic (Capocchi et al., 2020; Seraphin et al., 2020). The increased numbers of tourists to a destination meant increased income, but were nevertheless associated with negative impacts on the environment and the social sphere. Regulation of the number of tourists should also be part of a BE strategy, not only from the point of view of the long-term use of natural resources, but also of the natural environment of local residents, whether in rural or urban areas. Tourism must help to reduce climate change impact and must not be a burden on nature or the environment. The concept of BE-based tourism is part of sustainable tourism. However, it primarily focuses on the effective use of natural resources with the aim of maximizing their conservation or supporting their renewal. From the point of view of character, it thus most touches the economic and environmental pillar of sustainable tourism. Although nature-based tourism can also be part of BE-based tourism, if it meets the parameters of BE-based tourism, its main characteristics fall under the environmental pillar within the framework of sustainable tourism. Rural tourism covers all three pillars, but the environmental one occupies the main position (Özdemir and Yildiz, 2020). The last of those considered, i.e. ecotourism, based on its characteristics, extends into the social pillar because, in addition to trying to minimize the negative impact on the environment, it also addresses the impact on the local population. For this reason, the overlap of the mentioned forms and concepts of tourism is evident and mutually complementary. Baicu et al. (2019) mention the link between BE and sustainable hospitality. In particular, they mention accommodation facilities that have various initiatives to protect the environment and increase tourists’ awareness of environmental issues. However, if the bioeconomy concept is only on a voluntary level and is not
financially supported by external funds, most small and mediumsized enterprises will not be able to follow the strategically given goals. With the growing emphasis on the bioeconomy, it can be expected that, especially in developed countries, there will be an increasing emphasis on the reporting of resources associated with the bioeconomy. Many governments support the bioeconomy financially through direct and indirect investments (Wesseler and von Braun, 2017). Currently, the resources provided to the BE area are incomparable between states for many reasons (Rinn et al., 2023). However, if there is any harmonization of this view, it will be appropriate to study more the relationships between the financial impacts of tourism and other economic indicators. The identified characteristics for BE-based tourism are valid, of course, only if the participants of this tourism play a positive role towards nature, rural areas, and other participants. However, according to Capasso (2021), they can also contribute to the degradation of the natural (and rural) areas on which their business depends. 5 conclusion From the above results, it is clear that the concept of accentuation of forms of tourism differs in individual EU states but does not differ significantly in individual EU regions. States within one geographical region prefer similar forms of tourism suitable for similar natural conditions. RA1 (research answer): The aim of our work was to outline the link between tourism and BE in these regions through selected countries from all geographical regions of the EU. Based on the results we found it follows that in all the examined states, tourism is at least to some extent included in the concept of the BE of these states. However, this concept has a different degree of emphasis on this sector–see the breakdown of analysed countries into three groups. Frontiers in Environmental Science frontiersin.org10
RA2: Although the selected and analysed countries include tourism into the concept of BE, they do it with different emphasis. It follows from Table No. 2 and 3, and subsequent interpretation, that common conclusions cannot be drawn from the data analysed by us for the individual regions of the EU chosen by us, nor for the EU as a whole. The degree of integration of tourism into BE differs across regions in which the given state is located. Although it could be expected that countries where tourism has a larger share in GDP and tourism is considered as a priority would focus more on setting a tourism strategy in relation with the bioeconomy, this has not been confirmed. RA3: Common characteristics of individual forms and concepts of tourism can be combined under the term sustainability. When creating BE strategies, states should first consider the concept of sustainability, then select specific forms of tourism with potential for future development suitable for their conditions. Tourism can be part of the BE strategy of states. In particular, those with a higher share of tourism in GDP should perceive the potential for development in the connection of BE and tourism. Current travel and tourism strategies within the concept of BE should be created under sustainable pillars to ensure development which ensure maximum benefits for the current generation, but at the same time preserve these benefits for future generations as well. Bioeconomy-based tourism is a concept that considers the approach of BE in the field of tourism. It focuses above all on a sustainable level of tourism in the connection of economic and environmental pillars, where the main emphasis is placed on the effective use of natural resources and a maximum effort not to waste these resources, as well as to ensure their subsequent renewal. This article can help to establish a coordinated approach, facilitating sustainable development throughout the tourism industry’s system of actors. If the tourism strategy is in line with the concept of economic and environmental pillars of sustainable tourism, then it can be deduced that it is also in line with the concept of BE.