During this pandemic, Research and Development (R&D) firms were faced with the challenge to engage in collaborative networks to immediately find the cure for coronavirus. However, the closed and local model of the innovation ecosystem causes the innovation process carried out by a single laboratory to be slow and ineffective. We study how R&D firms should configure the open innovation ecosystem network for optimal collaborative learning. We argue that value creation in collaborative learning can be influenced by configuring structural connections and relational cohesion in a network of inter-organizational R&D collaborations. A model based on a combination of two network configurations, namely, inter-network connections and intra-network cohesion, was tested on 204 R&D collaborations from the pharmaceutical industry. Our study found an interaction effect between inter-network connections and intra-network cohesion on knowledge acquisition performance. Furthermore, when seeking optimal knowledge transfer, increasing investment commitment in R&D collaboration is more effective than extending the duration of a relationship. This study contributed a dynamic model of collaborative learning by testing the complementary effects between structural and relational configurations in the external and internal firm’s innovation ecosystem for sustainable knowledge acquisition performance. 1. conclusions As coronavirus strains mutate rapidly in different corners of the world, building learning networks is believed to be one of the most effective ways to develop and integrate knowledge from various sources. However, how R&D firms should configure the learning network structure for optimal collaborative learning remains unclear. Over-relying on inter-network connections through cross-border R&D alliances in this global pandemic situation provides some dilemmas. Bridging networks across countries may increase access to various possible external sources. However, the excessive bridging connections may not be beneficial for firms since the benefit of establishing a partnership with partners from various countries and technological backgrounds cannot be materialized without having substantial relational commitment among firms. This lack of relational linkage could potentially hinder the knowledge transfer process. This study reveals that the learning benefit from inter-network connections can be affected by configuring the intra-network cohesion inside the region. Our study suggests that bridging ties appear to be a simple construction as they have a special role in increasing access to various possible sources. However, excessive bridging ties may not be beneficial for the company, because the benefits of forming partnerships with partners who come from various cognitive backgrounds cannot be realized without substantial relational commitment between firms. A lack of relational relationships has the potential to hinder the knowledge transfer process. I suggest that the learning benefits of external bridging inter-network ties can be influenced by configuring intra-network cohesion. This study has several contributions to management practice. First, it is important to understand how companies manage external and internal network configurations to optimize learning outcomes. To optimize the flow of new knowledge, managers need to maintain internal relational cohesion, as well as an external bridging connection outside the learning network. When managing inter-network cohesion, our study also found that increasing the investment commitment with partners is more effective than extending the duration of an alliance. Second, this study enhances our understanding of the different roles of network embeddedness in alliance networks, both inside and outside innovation ecosystem networks. External bridging ties enhance a focal company’s ability to identify potentially diversified and valuable resources within the entire network. To realize this potential and maintain information flow, companies need to strengthen relational cohesion within their alliance network. Although our results are encouraging, this study should be interpreted with caution due to some inherent limitations in the patent citation data used. The high level of secrecy and the competitive patent race [73] in the pharmaceutical industry has created difficulties in accessing the latest data for this study. Despite its limitations, the study contributes to our understanding of the complex process of inter-organizational learning by identifying patterns of patent citations that have previously occurred with longitudinal studies that can be generalized. Further research should be undertaken to investigate the variations in network position (such as network centrality, ego betweenness, and structural equivalence) and the relational strength of alliances regarding the scope of collaboration [29]. Overall, I conclude that understanding the complex system of network configurations in the innovation ecosystem network requires breaking down the structural and relational configurations. This insight into the complementarity between the two configurations creates opportunities to improve an R&D firm’s position in the network, which, in turn, means that firms can optimize their advantages to be more innovative.