Background To estimate the incidence and concentration of catastrophic out‐of‐pocket payments for health‐ care and dental treatment, by region in Spain (calculated as the proportion of households needing to exceed a given threshold of their income to make these payments) in 2008, 2011 and 2015. Methods The data analysed were obtained from the Spanish Family Budget Survey reports for the years in question. The study method was that proposed by Wagstaff and van Doorslaer (2003), contrasting payments for dental treat‐ ment versus household income and considering thresholds of 10%, 20%, 30% and 40%, thus obtaining incidence rates. In addition, relevant sociodemographic variables were obtained for each household included in the study. Results With some regional heterogeneity, on average 4.75% of Spanish households spend more than 10% of their income on dental treatment, and 1.23% spend more than 40%. Thus, 38.67% of catastrophic out‐of‐pocket payments for dental services in Spain corresponds to payments at the 10% threshold. This value rises to 55.98% for a threshold of 40%. Conclusions An important proportion of catastrophic out‐of‐pocket payments for health care in Spain corresponds to dental treatment, a service that has very limited availability under the Spanish NHS. This finding highlights the need to formulate policies aimed at enhancing dental cover, in order to reduce inequalities in health care and, conse‐ quently, enhance the population’s quality of life and health status. conclusions. A second limitation is that the data is somewhat older. conclusions To our knowledge, this is the first study to be conducted on catastrophic OPS on general and dental health services in Spain, disaggregated by regions. In 2022, the Spanish Ministry of Health announced a proposal to expand the coverage of the common portfolio of the Spanish NHS services with respect to dental care services, with special attention to the following groups: children and adolescents, pregnant women, people with disabilities, the elderly and vulnerable populations. The main objective of this reform is to increase the coverage of healthcare benefits, through better intersectoral coordination, transversality and the introduction of new technologies. The cost of this proposal is expected to be 45.6 million euros [37]. According to the proposal, new policies in this area should be applied in two ways. On the one hand, as most dental spending concerns restorative work, more effort is needed on policies to promote oral health and to prevent disease, especially in the early stages of life (childhood and youth stages), fostering not only healthy nutrition, but also good habits of oral health. Appropriate interventions in primary and secondary schools such as awareness campaigns, the public provision (or subsidy) of dental care resources (toothbrushes, toothpaste, fluoridisation, etc.) and the design of health-focused diets would enhance nutritional education and help prevent dental diseases, both direct and indirect. In addition, public policies should focus oral health reviews on people in situations of financial vulnerability, who are otherwise less likely to seek dental treatment [12]. 