Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) systems are two-sided markets, with two mutually exclusive sets of agents, i.e., travelers/users and operators, forming a mobility ecosystem in which multiple operators compete or cooperate to serve customers under a governing platform provider. This study proposes a MaaS platform equilibrium model based on many-to-many assignment games incorporating both fixed-route transit services and mobility-on-demand (MOD) services. The matching problem is formulated as a convex multicommodity flow network design problem under congestion (modeling the cost of accessing MOD services). The local stability conditions reflect a generalization of Wardrop’s principles that include operator decisions. Due to the presence of congestion, the problem may result in non-stable designs, and a subsidy mechanism from the platform is proposed to guarantee local stability. A new exact solution algorithm to the matching problem is proposed based on a branch and bound framework with a FrankWolfe algorithm integrated with Lagrangian relaxation and subgradient optimization, which guarantees the optimality of the matching problem but not stability. A heuristic which integrates stability conditions and subsidy design is proposed, which reaches either the optimal MaaS platform equilibrium solution with global stability, or a feasible locally stable solution that may require subsidy. For the heuristic, a worst-case bound and condition for obtaining an exact solution are both identified. Two sets of reproducible numerical experiments are conducted. The first, on a toy network, verifies the model and algorithm, and illustrates the differences between local and global stability. The second, on an expanded Sioux Falls network with 82 nodes and 748 links, derives generalizable insights about the model for coopetitive interdependencies between operators sharing the platform, handling congestion effects in MOD services, effects of local stability on investment impacts, and illustrating inequities that may arise under heterogeneous populations. 1  6 conclusion In this study, we propose a MaaS platform design method for MaaS systems which incorporate fixed-
route transit services and MOD services, with dummy links that model users’ choice of not being a part of the system. The matching problem is formulated as a convex multicommodity network design problem. We
derive local stability conditions corresponding to this matching problem and define the optimum that is further constrained to be locally stable to be a globally stable MaaS platform equilibrium. We show that certain variables for this solution to be unique allowing for market design analysis. An exact solution algorithm is proposed to solve the matching problem. The algorithm has a branch
and bound framework. Each branch is solved through subgradient optimization with a Frank-Wolfe algorithm in each iteration. We prove that due to congestion effects, matchings may be locally unstable. A heuristic is derived from the exact algorithm to solve for a feasible solution to the MaaS platform equilibrium. Local stability is guaranteed by finding a solution that is either naturally stable or subsidized. Two sets of numerical examples are conducted. With the smaller toy case, we verify the model and
algorithm, showing how different locally stable solutions may exist of which one is the globally stable MaaS platform equilibrium. The larger case involves an expanded version of Sioux Falls with 82 nodes and 748 links. We show, among other insights, the following:
• The proposed model can quantify changes in operating costs for one operator in a MaaS platform inducing other operators’ market entry decisions due to coopetitive effects. • The proposed model can quantify impacts of congestion on operators’ design decisions. • A reduction in operating cost to an operator may not have any impact on the market equilibrium due to local stability requirement. • The modeling of heterogeneous user groups can capture inequities in the market where operators enter primarily to serve higher income users while leaving more lower income users out of the
platform. The method could be applied to service design of MaaS ecosystems, including network design, pricing,
and subsidy design. The method is able to incorporate services with different levels of flexibility: fixedroute transit (e.g. subway, bus) and MOD (e.g. ride-hailing, ride-sharing, bikesharing), and ensure the stability of the designed system. We can use this model to design external subsidies, fare bundles, different service region designs in the context of a mobility ecosystem, user heterogeneity, and evaluate the impact of a new external mode (which would alter the dummy link travel disutilities by altering the logsums). The current bottleneck to the computation cost is the shortest path finding. In the subgradient
optimization, different OD pairs have different network costs. Hence, the shortest path finding has to be run as one-to-one. When the number of user groups is large, computation cost can grow significantly if high accuracy is required, requiring modeling trade-offs in zone aggregation. Computation cost can be controlled by adjusting the tolerable gap between the upper and lower bound in branch and bound, and tolerance parameters of subgradient optimization and Frank-Wolfe algorithm. If there is a tolerable budget of subsidized system total cost, the branch and bound can be terminated when a solution below the budget is found.