We quantify information flows between geopolitical risk (GPR) and global financial assets such as equity, bonds, and commodities, with a focus on the Russian-Ukrainian conflict. We combine transfer entropy and the I-CEEMDAN framework to measure information flows at multi-term scales. Our empirical results indicate that (i) in the short term, crude oil and Russian equity show opposite responses to GPR; (ii) in the medium and long term, GPR information increases the risk in the financial market; and (iii) the efficiency of the financial asset markets can be confirmed on a long-term scale. These findings have important implications for market participants, such as investors, portfolio managers, and policymakers. conclusion In this study, we investigate information flows from GPR caused by the Russian-Ukrainian conflict to various financial assets by combining the Rényi transfer entropy and I-CEEMDAN methods. Furthermore, we estimate the dynamic response of financial assets to GPR at multiterm scales, that is, short-, middle-, and long-term scales. Our main findings are summarized as follows: First, in the short term, crude oil and Rus-
sian equity have positive and negative ETE values, respectively, corresponding to the GPR. Therefore, they can be a pair capable of exhibiting a portfolio diversification effect corresponding to GPR in the short term. Second, in the medium term, most assets have negative ETE values. In other words, information on GPR increases the risk of financial assets. This result is also observed in the long term. Third, efficiency of the studied asset markets lies in the long term, all of which respond significantly negatively to information flow from geopolitical risks, eliminating all forms of hedging and diversification benefits between traditional assets and essential commodities. These findings have several implications for market participants. For example, investors
can establish effective investment strategies by leveraging the short-term relationship between GPR and financial assets, as shown by the results of this study. Furthermore, this relationship can be utilized for asset allocation, risk taking, and portfolio management. In addition, since GPR information increases the risks associated with financial assets in the medium- and longterm, portfolio managers need to take action to hedge against an increase in GPR that is forecasted for a period beyond the medium term. Consequently, policymakers should monitor the relationship between GPR and financial assets over different timescales to avoid market turmoil. Our findings suggest that if policymakers were to monitor the flow of market information over different time scales (short-, medium-, and long-term) they could prevent the kind of financial market disruptions caused by the Russia-Ukraine conflict. Despite the resilience of our methodological framework, a time-varying perspective of the
information flow from GPR to the analyzed markets is lacking. supporting information  s1 appendix. (PDF) acknowledgments The authors thank the editor Hung Do, and three referees for useful suggestions. 