One perspective to view the economic development of cities is through the presence of multinational firms; how subsidiaries of various organizations are set up throughout the globe and how cities are connected to each other through these networks of multinational firms. Analysis of these networks can reveal interesting economical and spatial trends, as well as help us understand the importance of cities in national and regional economic development. This paper aims to study networks of cities formed due to the linkages of multinational firms over a decade (from 2010 to 2019). More specifically we are interested in analyzing the growth and stability of various cities in terms of the connections they form with other cities over time. Our results can be summarized into two key findings: First, we ascertain the central position of several cities due to their economically stable connections; Second, we successfully identify cities that have evolved over the past decade as the presence of multinational firms has increased in these cities.  A couple of European cities also indicated growth in their connections, while cities from other regions showed no significant change in their connections. 5.3 Summary of Results and Discussion
Based on the discussion, an analysis of the topological overlap allowed us to reach some critical conclusions. Firstly, the stable cities identified in our study align with previous studies related to important cities of the world. These include New York, London, Paris, and Tokyo, which are home to many multinational firms. Secondly, the identified changing cities in China hinted towards a decentralized economic strategy as almost all the identified cities belonged to different provinces. Most of these Chinese cities have ports (either seaport or inland port) which are vital for trade [16]. China’s inclination towards international trade for economic growth is also highlighted by the development of the landlocked city of Urumqi, which is pivotal for its Belt and Road initiative. Lastly, the changing cities identified in the US showed less inclination towards international trade as only a few of them are port cities. Furthermore, a majority of their connections were found within the US with the highly connected Interstate Highway System facilitating domestic trade between cities [22]. These factors suggest the US’ self-dependence on the economic growth of its changing cities. From a macroscopic point of view, analyzing the data set makes a strong case of a relational economy [4] where interactions among global companies situated geographically around the world play an important role in the economic development of not just cities, but regions and even countries to some extent. The complex interconnected systems, inter-dependencies, global exchanges, intertwined economies and, local and national policies all play a vital role in shaping the economic landscape of the world we live in. This study provides evidence that integrated relational economies result in creating and adding value to the modern successes of fast growing cities and countries. 6 conclusions and future work In this paper, we studied the network of cities formed through multinational companies and their subsidiaries for 2010 and 2019. We used topological overlap as a metric to identify stable and changing cities in this network. The stable cities identified in this paper further strengthen previous studies on the importance of cities like New York, London, Paris, and Tokyo[20,25]. Stable cities are home to many multinational firms, which contribute to the economic stability of these cities. Analyzing the list of changing cities, it is clear that most of them are in the US or China. Changing cities in China are not concentrated in a single region implying decentralization strategy for economic growth. Most of these cities are port cities, indicating a higher focus on international trade for economic growth. On the other hand, US cities showed more intent towards domestic trade as these cities are densely connected within the country, and only a few of them are port cities. Coincidentally, all cities identified in the changing cities indicated growth. 7 conflict of interest statement All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.