Becoming pregnant and giving birth under the age of 20 is associated with a range of adverse social, socioeconomic and health outcomes for adolescent girls and their children in Low and middle income countries. Cash transfers are an example of a structural intervention that can change the local social and economic environment, and have been linked with positive health and social outcomes across several domains. As part of a wider review of structural adolescent contraception interventions, we conducted a systematic review on the impact of cash transfers on adolescent contraception and fertility. Fifteen studies were included in the review with eleven studies providing evidence for meta-analyses on contraception use, pregnancy and childbearing. The evidence suggests that cash transfer interventions are generally ineffective in raising levels of contraceptive use. However, cash transfer interventions did reduce levels of early pregnancy (OR 0.90, 95% CI 0.81 to 1.00). There was suggestive evidence that conditional, but not unconditional, cash transfers reduce levels of early childbearing. Given that much of the evidence is drawn from interventions providing cash transfers conditional on school attendance, supporting school attendance may enable adolescent girls and young women to make life choices that do not involve early pregnancy. conclusions Currently, over 140 women per 1000 give birth between the ages of 15–19 years in 22 countries (for reference this number is 12 per 1000 in the UK) [63]. This review suggests that offering cash transfers, primarily to encourage school attendance, may be an effective strategy in reducing the odds of early pregnancy, although the evidence in terms of increasing contraceptive use is not conclusive. Although the reduction in the odds of early pregnancy may be viewed as relatively modest, this may nevertheless have substantial impacts on a population level. Cash transfers are likely to be particularly effective where social systems support educational and labour market opportunities for young women. supporting information  s1 checklist. prisma checklist. (DOCX) s1 appendix. search strategy.