Traditional art pricing models often lack fine measurements of painting content. This paper proposes a new content measurement: the Shannon information quantity measured by the singular value decomposition (SVD) entropy of the painting image. Using a large sample of artworks’ auction records and images, we show that the SVD entropy positively affects the sales price at 1% significance level. Compared to the other commonly adopted content variables, the SVD entropy has advantages in variable significance, sample robustness as well as model fit. Considering the convenient availability of digital painting images and the straightforward calculation algorithm of this measurement, we expect its wide application in future research. JEL: G12, Z1, Z11 1 theoretical background and hypothesis This section will discuss the theoretical background and explain how it leads to our main hypothesis. 1.1 information extraction from paintings Our research analyzes digital images of paintings. The digital image is composed of pixels. Each pixel is a basic information capsule that can be completely describled by the pixel’s R (red), G (green) and B(blue) values, and the pixel’s two-dimensional coordinates in the image plane.5 Researchers try to extract useful information from these painting images in order to better understand the price-formation mechanism of paintings. The literature in this strand mainly concentrates on the relationship between a painting’s color composition and its sales price. For example, Pownall and Graddy (2016) average the R, G and B values of all pixels in a painting image and introduce them into the traditional hedonic model as the new explanatory variables. Stepanova (2019) further integrates this three-dimensional RGB information via a clustering algorithm, and identifies those principal color clusters that may affect a painting’s sales price. Ma et al. (2022) study the effect of colors on artwork pricing via the HSV (hue, saturation, value) color system. HSV describes the three different aspects of color, each of which is a unique aggregation of the underlying RGB values.6 Compared to RGB values, the HSV system appears more intuitive considering the human perception of colors. The literature also raises two main concerns for us. First, previous research reveals certain links between colors and human emotions, e.g., Boyatzis and Varghese (1994) and Hemphill (1996). But how emotions can affect investment decisions seems more complex. There are both rational and behavioral schools in the study of investment decisions. To disentangle the effect of emotions during the art investment decision process poses great challenges. Further research is warranted for this color-emotion-investment transmission mechanism. Second, even though HSV is more intuitive than RGB, it does not reduce the dimensionality of information. How this multidimensional information interacts with each other to influnce art pricing also calls for further studies.7 More importantly, a painting’s colors
5RGB stands for the strength of the three additive primary colors (red, green and blue) in a pixel on the scale of 0 to 255. For example, RGB (0, 0, 0) means that the proportions of red, green and blue are all 0%, so the pixel is black. RGB (255, 255, 255) indicates that the proportions of the three colors are 100%, and the pixels are white. 6See Appendix A for detailed formulas. 7Besides HSV, there exist other alternative color models like HSI (hue, saturation, intensity), HSL
are intrinsically attached to its structural elements, such as line, shape, form, space, etc. This implies that the positional information of color element in the image plane shall also be considered, which, however, is often ignored in the previous research. A further complication also arises from the interaction of color elements with these structural elements when they contribute to the sales price aggregately. Ma et al. (2022) address some of these issues. For example, to separate the effect of colors from the structural elements of a painting, they adopt a sample that excludes those with figurative work, repeated patterns and less traditional shapes. To test the coloremotion-valuation mechanism, they run lab experiments in different locations, collecting the viewers’ subjective valuations for the images with different color attributes. We think the experiment results might be interpreted with some caution, because the actual sales price is driven by the real buyer’s decision (not the viewer’s). Interestingly, Blum (2021) finds that the tastes of collectors often go in the opposite direction to those of outsiders. From the above discussion, we can see that predicting a painting’s sales price based on its color component requires certain restrictions. In this paper, we then ask whether other types of information can be extracted from a painting’s image, which is more robust and applicable to more heterogenous painting contents. Drawing on the Shannon information theory, we suggest a concept called information quantity, as a new type of information extraction for paintings. The following discussion tries to answer two essential questions: the first is why the information quantity of a painting can be linked to its sales price, and the second is what direction this link is. 1.2 consensus on information quantity The valuation of a painting, as well as other cultural goods, is often considered to lack objective criteria. In contrast, for those traditional assets like stocks and bonds, we can always benchmark against their dividends and interests. In spite of the existence of generally agreed guidelines, the actual assessment of cultural goods often involves subjective judgements. When an artwork receives conflicting views, its valuation must (hue, saturation, lightness), HSB (hue, saturation, brightness), etc. Whether the effect of colors on art pricing is sensitive to the choice of color models also needs further studies. rely on some kind of consensus reached by specific groups through social interactions (Lamont (2009), Lewandowska and Smolarska (2020)). Then, what kind of attributes of artwork can share the agreement of all people? For a painting, we often point to those objective features, e.g., the painting size and material. They have long been included in the hedonic regression model. So we propose that those features of unambiguous consensus tend to act as significant pricing factors for paintings. Of course, the most essential part of a painting is its content. But people find it much harder to reach a consensus when interpreting an artwork’s content, because people are born with differential preferences (Graham et al. (2010), Blum (2021)). We suggest looking for those features in a painting’s content that can be described objectively, hence obtaining a natural consensus. Some of such variables that we know include the painting’s signature, date, color composition, etc. Not surprisingly, various researchers have already introduced them into the art pricing model. Note that the signature and date are dummy variables hence providing very coarse information on content. The color composition is unique to each painting, but it requires additional restrictions to be significant hence not robust (as we argued before and will show below). We propose the amount of information (information quantity) contained in the artwork image as a new content variable. It quantifies how much information a painting delivers to the audience. It uniquely labels each painting’s content and can be measured objectively. So it also belongs to the features of unambiguous consensus, similar to size, material, signature, etc. Naturally, it could also be a potentially significant pricing factor. In this paper, we adopt a narrow definition for information proposed by Claude Shannon, i.e., a message sent by a sender to a receiver. He suggested a quantity measurement for such information, defined as entropy. Shannon asserted that information is used to resolve uncertainty. Therefore, the amount of information a signal transmits can be quantified by the degree of uncertainty that the signal resolves. A higher degree of uncertainty from a signal implies a greater chance of ‘surprise’ by the receiver, hence resolving it delivers more information. However, Number 5 has an SVD entropy of 7.96, as its singular values are widely spread out. This SVD entropy value is close to the maximum possible value, log2 400 = 8.64. SVD entropy has several properties suitable for computing the information quantity based on digital images. For example, singular values are invariant under both rotation (by 90◦, 180◦, and 270◦) and reflection (on the x and y axes). Additionally, SVD entropy is invariant under the linear scaling of the image matrix (e.g., brightness adjustment). Because the singular values of λM are λσi (λ > 0), the SVD entropy of λM is the same as that of M . SVD entropy is widely applied in feature selection research in computer graphics, e.g., Banerjee and Pal (2014) and Buisine et al. (2021). SVD effectively extracts the important features from a painting, so the entropy based on these important features, i.e., the SVD entropy, will be an appropriate measurement for the painting’s information quantity. 3 data and methodology Next, we will describe our data and empirical methodology, which we adopt to test the effect of SVD entropy on a painting’s sales price. 3.1 data We obtain our data from FindArtInfo, an art database website that provides auction records of artwork worldwide from 2000 to 2015. The database has a large number of records with auction prices, painting attributes, and digital images of auctioned items, making it ideal for our research. A lot of recent research, such as Filipiak and Filipowska (2016), Ayub et al. (2017), and Powell et al. (2019), has adopted this database. In particular, we collect auction records from the website using the web crawler algorithm modified from that used in Ayub et al. (2017).12
The database contains more than one million auction records of artwork in various forms from approximately 300,000 artists. To focus on the artworks with liquidity, we restrict our sample to the auction items that belong to the top 1% artists, who are ranked by the number of auction records (with images) in the database. We then obtain 3,004 artists, whose minimum number of observations is 99. Among all forms of artwork, we only select those related to paintings via their medium keywords as the search criteria.13 Finally, we obtain 529,654 observations with digital images. Although they are only from the top 1% artists, the sample accounts for approximately 38% of the total records in the database. Table 1 reports the distribution of the auction prices. We can see that most of the auction prices (75.44%) fall into the range between 100 and 100,000 US dollars. When retrieving the digital images, we resize them to uniform 400× 400 pixels using the bicubic interpolation method rather than using the images in their original resolutions.14 This is because we want to compare the SVD entropies when the physical dimensions of the painting are controlled. Note that the width and height of paintings are to be included as control variables in all of our regression specifications as well. 13We eliminate those records with the following keywords in their medium labels: bronze, iron, sculpture, terracotta, assemblage, steel, marble, aluminum, brass, ceramic, porcelain, resin, plaster, metal, plastic and stone. 14See Keys (1981) for the conclusion The hedonic models of art pricing often lack fine measurements of painting content. The traditional content measurements are normally categorical data, e.g, dummies of signature, dated, topic, style, and sometimes expert assessment. This paper proposes a
new measurement to account for content heterogeneity, which is neither categorical nor subjective, i.e., the Shannon information quantity of the painting. We suggest using SVD entropy to measure the Shannon information quantity based on each painting’s digital image. Our empirical tests show that the Shannon information quantity (measured by SVD entropy) of a painting is a significant and robust pricing factor. It is also superior to the other usual content variables, such as the signature dummy and the dated dummy, in terms of the improvement to model fit. Our research demonstrates that applying computer graphic techniques to art pricing is valuable. Also, we can investigate the information in threedimensional artworks, such as sculptures and porcelains, so as to improve their pricing models. a grayscale and hsv The grayscale determines the relative distance (or grayness) between white and black.