The study investigates the impact of financial distress (credit spread) and liquidity crises (TED spread) on size, value, profitability, investment and momentum premiums within the US Real Estate Investment Trust market. Using daily data from 2001 to 2020, we examine the presence, magnitude and significance of these premiums, along with assessing if these premiums are associated with higher risk. The study then employs Auto-regressive distributed lag and Error Correction Modeling to establish the long/short-run impact of financial distress and liquidity crisis on these premiums during recessionary and non-recessionary phases, including COVID-19. Premiums associated with all five factors are positive and significant. Secondly, in contradiction to the Efficient Market Hypothesis, we find that value and momentum portfolios provide superior returns without exposing investors to higher risk while portfolios based on size, profitability and investment, do tend to expose investors to a higher risk. Thirdly, in contradiction to the risk based explanation of Fama–French/Carhart (2015/1997), we find significant evidence of a fall in profitability and momentum premiums with an uptick in financial distress and liquidity crisis. On the other hand, size, value and investment premiums rise with financial distress/liquidity crisis, only during the recessionary phases. This impact is insignificant during non-recessionary phases. 1. conclusions In summary, this paper has contributed to a better understanding of the existence of factor based premiums within the REIT market, the risk associated with these premiums, and the impact of default risk and liquidity crisis on these premiums during recessionary and expansionary phases. Currently, there is a lack of clear evidence in literature regarding the existence of positive and statistically significant SMB, HML, RMW, CMA and WML premiums within
the US REIT market. This, coupled with the fact that the US REIT sector has a significantly rising market capitalization (an uptick in interest within the asset class), it has witnessed a hike in institutional investment (Chen and Zhang 1998), and the transitioning returns behavior within the sector relative to stocks, potentially providing diversification benefits in a multi-asset portfolio (Glascock et al. 2000), we feel that there are merits to conducting research on the existence of these premiums within the US REIT market. Between July 2001 and June 2020, we find the presence of significant and positive premiums associated with size, value, profitability, investment and momentum based strategies. Astute investors can take advantage of these premiums to earn superior returns in the REIT market. Risk analysis reveals that the excess returns based on size, profitability and investment are associated with a higher systematic risk. This is consistent with the riskbased explanation of Fama and French (1996, 2015) and the Efficient Market Hypothesis. Our results for the value premium and momentum premiums contradict the risk-based explanation. We do find a higher idiosyncratic risk for value REITs relative to growth REITs, supporting the hypothesis that value REITs are systematically mispriced, potentially due to naive extrapolation by investors, and provides an explanation for why arbitrageurs might be deterred from exploiting this mispricing within value REITs. On the other hand, a relatively lower idiosyncratic risk associated with winner REITs implies that these REITs are less prone to mispricing compared to loser REITs. Our results support the argument of an under-reaction from the market in connection to historical returns of winner REITs (Jegadeesh and Titman 1993), potentially due to transaction costs, but resulting in a consistently positive and significant return on momentum strategy. Finally, this paper examines the impact of financial distress and liquidity crisis, on factor based premiums within the US REIT market, controlling for stock market returns. Our data set spans from July 2001 to June 2020, which includes periods of significant shifts within financial distress and the probability of liquidity crisis. To capture this structural shift and its impact on factor premiums, we split our sample into five sub-samples, based on recessionary and non-recessionary periods as specified by NBER. During recessionary phases, we find that both credit spread and TED spread have a significant and positive impact on SMB, HML and CMA premiums. As the probability of financial distress and liquidity crisis rises, the general risk levels within the economy rise, enhancing the relative risk associated with small, value and conservative investment (weak prospects) REITs. Therefore, investors demand a higher compensatory return on these REITs. These results are consistent with the risk-based explanation of Fama and French (1996, 2015). During non-recessionary phases, both credit spread and TED spread seem to have mostly an insignificant influence on these factor premiums. For both RMW and WML, investor sentiments tend to dominate the impact of credit spread and TED spread on these premiums during recessionary phases. As the probability of financial distress and liquidity crisis goes up, investors’ route more funds towards robust profitability and winner REITs, enhancing the price of these REITs, and having a downward or negative impact on compensatory premiums required to incentivize investors. This is in contradiction to the risk-based explanation of Fama and French (2015) and Carhart (1997). During expansionary phases, generally we find the effect of an under-reaction from investors dominate these relationships, resulting in inflated premiums with a rise in credit spread and TED spread. The impact of the S&P 500 index is negative on all premiums, during the nonrecessionary state, implying that investors with portfolio exposures to factor based REIT premiums and stock indexing, would see a fall in their premiums with a corresponding rise in the index or as a consequence of a bullish stock market. This impact is reversed for all premiums in the recessionary state, apart from WML, which still has a negative relationship with the S&P 500 index. Factor based style investment strategies have been used extensively as a portfolio constructing mechanism within stocks, to beat the market. This paper looks to assess the ability of these strategies to generate abnormal returns within the US REIT market
using daily returns and a data set that spans 19 years (4754 observations). In terms of the risk associated with these strategies, prior literature, such as Ooi et al. (2007), test the risk associated with value strategies within the REIT market using standard deviation, beta from the CAPM model, and factor loadings from the Fama–French three factor model. We extend on this study by testing this risk based explanation for not just the value premium but also for SMB, RMW, CMA, and WML strategies. Additionally, we not only use the risk measures as suggested by Ooi et al. (2007) but also use the factor loadings on the Fama–French five factor, and the Carhart four factor model as a robustness measure. Furthermore, we assess the role of arbitrage risk in deterring arbitrageurs from exploiting potential mispricing related to these factor-based premiums, hence providing us with a deeper understanding on the role of mispricing in the existence of these premiums. Thirdly, this study is unique in terms of explicitly examining the relationship between default risk, liquidity crises, stock market index, and factor based REIT premiums, establishing long- and short-run relationships using Auto-Regressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) modeling and Error Correction Modeling (ECM), for three recessionary phases, and two non-recessionary phases. 
This table represents results of the bounds test for the first period (July 2001 to November 2001), the second period (December 2001 to November 2007), the third period (December 2007 to June 2009), the fourth period (July 2009 to January 2020) and the fifth period (February 2020 to June 2020). The ARDL specs are the optimal lags for RMW premium, credit spread, TED spread and the S&P 500 index, as specified by the Akaike info criterion (AIC). The F-statistic is for a joint test of the following hypothesis as set up in Equation (5): H0: β5 = β6 = β7 = β8 = 0.  Note that the scaling on the y-axis in these graphs varies based on the dispersion of these individual premiums. 11 The square root of the residual variance derived from the univariate CAPM model is used to represent idiosyncratic return volatility, and this is an indicator for arbitrage risk. 12 For reasons of brevity, these results are presented in the Appendix A section. 13 Investors tend to be overly optimistic about future prospects of growth stocks, while they tend to be overly pessimistic about
prospects of value stocks, and when these expectations are not realized, it results in a higher return on value stocks and a lower return on growth stocks (Ooi et al. 2007). 14 We find a significant and negative correlation between the S&P 500 Index and WML premiums (−2.3%) for our full sample. For reasons of brevity, a table of these results has not been included in the main body of this paper. 15 We find significant and negative correlation between the S&P 500 Index and HML premiums during the non-recessionary phase that follows the dot-com crash (−13.5%) and the non-recessionary phase that follows the 2007/08 recession (−16%). For reasons of brevity, a table of these results has not been included in the main body of this paper. 16 Stock price multiplied by shares outstanding. 