Low-income communities have limited capital and access to money or loans from formal financial institutions. To solve the problems, the government provides solutions, one of them is by forming a microfinance program, namely Rural Agribusiness Business Development (PUAP). PUAP program is one of the grant activities to farmer group association (Gapoktan) with a total capital assistance of IDR 100 million. The problem with the 52,186 Gapoktan units that participated in PUAP activities, only 7,703 units (15%) were transformed into Agribusiness Microfinance Institutions (LKMA). This paper differs from others as it briefly explains the PUAP/MFI’s institutional transformation and the factors that affect its sustainability, which is so far still limited discussed. The paper aims to see what transformations Gapoktan becomes an inclusive LKMA and the level of sustainability of the LKMA. The research was conducted in Kendal Regency, Central JavaIndonesia, in 2022 on 5 LKMA. The process of transforming LKMA into an inclusive financial institution is analyzed descriptively. LKMA sustainability levels were analyzed using a multidimensional scaling (MDS) approach with the Rapfish application. So far, MDS with the Rapfish application is still very limited for microfinance analysis. MDS analysis is employed because it is relatively simple and effective for looking at sensitive attributes in improving sustainability and generating leverage attributes that can be used for policy-making. The result study shows that the transformation of PUAP into LKMA is driven by the ability to improve legality, financial governance and diversify the customer’s business field. The five LKMAs have a sustainability status of ’sufficient’ in running their business, with an index value of more than 50%. The study recommends 1) the Indonesian government could assist LKMA in improving its legality and 2) LKMA’s management should get training by experts to improve its financial capability to manage the cost saving. PLOS ONE PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0286482 June 23, 2023 1 / 20 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 conclusion Five LKMAs that received business capital loans from the Government Investment Center of the Ministry of Finance in Kendal Regency are moderately sustainable and can be continued. It is shown from the MDS index result is more than 50. Meanwhile, attributes that could affect the sustainability of the five microfinances are i) the increasing lender number, ii) the increase in other costs besides interest at the time of borrowing, and iii) the development type of microfinance institutions source of income, (iv) MFI expenditure, and (v) legality. MFI management could maintain and improve sustainability by ameliorating financial performance. It can be done by increasing efficiency through cost savings and the amount of capital supported by strengthening aspects of MFI legality. The Agribusiness Microcredit Institution, formed through government grants, can slowly transform into an inclusive institution providing business capital loans for the communities’ economy. The transformation of the institution through the process of learning and escort in its implementation. The most critical processes include: (i) completing legality requirements as a financial institution, (ii) clear and transparent governance represented from financial
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0286482 June 23, 2023 15 / 20
statements, (iii) knowing and utilizing information technology in operationalizing work and (iv) escorting and assisting continuously, both from the central and local governments, especially in completing administrative requirements, management training and financial reporting regularly. We recommend that the Indonesian government could assist LKMA in improving its legality and LKMA’s management should get training by experts to improve its financial capability to manage the cost saving. The limitation of this study is that the study was only conducted in Kendal Regency, Central
Java, Indonesia, while spatial resource conditions vary between districts.