The marginal privacy cost c in [1, 10] can capture different cases where sellers with high, medium, or low privacy concerns. As shown in Fig. 6, we simulate three capacity scenarios, respectively. More specifically, ω = 1 is the single capacity (one buyer per seller) scenario, ω = 8 is the limited capacity (multiple buyers per seller) scenario, and ω = ∞ is the unlimited capacity scenario. The x-axis is the commodity quality and y-axis is the marginal privacy cost. The notations of “P ”(poor),“M”(medium) and “G”(good) refer to the partition of sellers’ qualities, which have been defined in Section III-C2. In each of the subfigures, the blue shaded area corresponds to the eligible region, within which each seller can be the seller who discloses information at equilibria. For example, any seller in the eligible region of Fig. 6(c) disclosing information and other sellers not is an equilibrium in the unlimited capacity scenario. Fig. 6 shows that the sellers who can disclose information (i.e., in the eligible region) have high qualities and low marginal costs (as proved in Theorems 2, 3, and 4). Furthermore, larger capacities (i.e., larger ω) require the sellers with full disclosure at an equilibrium to have higher (more competitive) qualities, corresponding to Q ≥ 12 in single capacity scenario, Q ≥ 17 in limited capacity scenario, and Q ≥ 19 in unlimited capacity scenario in Fig. 6. Therefore, as the sellers’ capacities increase, a smaller number of sellers can disclose information at an equilibrium. This is consistent with our finding that larger capacity strengthens the competition among sellers and thus discourages the information disclosure. Moreover, this paper provides a clear understanding of the observations in previous numerical studies in literature and some system regulations in practice. For example, Xu et al. [32] numerically showed that extra information may exhibit a diminishing effect on buyer purchase behavior. This has been validated and explained by our paper that disclosing information is worse than no disclosure in some cases (Theorem 1). Airbnb has launched the Airbnb Select program to improve property qualities and has restricted hosts from renting out multiple properties in some areas [19], [20]. Both regulations eventually encourage sellers’ information disclosure according
to our analysis (Theorem 1 and Corollary 1). Overall, the results in this paper provide guidelines for sellers to optimize information disclosure behaviors in sharing systems. The results can also facilitate sharing systems’ regulation decisions and incentive mechanism design. vi. conclusion This paper studied sellers’ information disclosure strategies in competition in sharing systems. We captured the trade-off between sellers’ commodity display effects and privacy costs, and proposed a two-stage game to characterize the interactions between sellers and buyers. We completely presented the complex structure of equilibria under different conditions despite the non-convexity of the optimization problem. The results showed that full disclosure by all sellers will never be an equilibrium even if they all have good qualities and low costs; none of the sellers disclosing information will make all sellers get zero profit.