Received Aug 31, 2021 Revised Aug 03, 2022 Accepted Aug 18, 2022 In mitigating the peak demand, the energy authority in Malaysia has introduced the enhanced time of use (EToU). However, the number of participants joining the programs is less than expected. Due to that reason, this study investigated the investment benefit in terms of electricity cost reduction when consumers subscribe to the EToU tariff scheme. The significant consumers from industrial tariff types have been focused on where the load profiles were collected from the incoming providers’ power stations. Meanwhile, ant colony optimization (ACO) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) are applied to optimize the load profiles reflecting EToU tariff prices. The proposed method had shown a reduction in electricity cost, and the most significant performance has been recorded congruently. For a maximum 30% load adjustment using ACO optimization, the electricity costs have been decreased by 10% (D type of tariff), 16% (E1 type of tariff), 9% (E2 kind of tariff), and 1.13% (E3 type of tariff) when compared to the existing conventional tariff. The cost-benefit of the EToU tariff switching has been identified where the simple payback period (SPP) is below one year for all the industrial types of consumers. 1. conclusion The electricity cost has been successfully reduced by applying the simultaneous demand side strategies and implementing the optimization of ACO and PSO algorithms. The proposed simultaneous DSM strategies have shifted the peak usage of industrial D, E1, E2, and E3 load profiles to off-peak zones based on the six-segmentation of EToU electricity tariff. The valley filling strategies have changed the load profile load curve by filling in the off-peak zones. The load clipping and load shifting have successfully reduced the peak consumptions and shift them to off-peak zones. As a result, the maximum demand in the baseline cases has been shifted to mid-peak zones, contributing to the decrease in electricity bill cost. Other than that, the performance of optimization algorithms, ACO, and PSO has been analyzed, and the ability to handle the energy load profile makes it easier for the optimization process. PSO algorithms were found more efficient in reducing the price of electricity while using the EToU tariff rates. From the analysis, the D tariff users should remain using the flatt tariff as the electricity usage and price are cheaper. Meanwhile, for E1, E2 and E3, they should change to EToU tariff. But the users need to carefully manage their load profile to utilize the benefits from EToU tariff fully.