conclusion The problem of tobacco use and its negative relationship with the living standards of the population has been broadly recognised in the scientific research.34–36 The evidence on crowding out of tobacco spending shows a high burden especially in LMICs, many of which continue to have high smoking prevalence. As a result, the households with smokers sacrifice spending on other commodities, including those essential for human capital development of all household members and especially children. This issue is specifically concerning in case of the poor households with constrained budgets as it exacerbates the long- term risk of falling into the poverty trap. This study analysed which commodity groups are displaced by tobacco in the household budget in Montenegro. The analysis was conducted using the HBS data to estimate a 3SLS model. The results confirm that tobacco consumption sacrifices the resources on necessities, while benefiting other non- healthy consumption. Similar to the previous studies in LMICs, this study shows that tobacco spending crowds out the resources on clothing, housing and education.3 6 7 10 13 15 18 Considering food categories, households with smokers compared with those without smokers spend less on cereals, dairy products (other than milk) and fruits and vegetables. These items are very important for healthy nutrition and are sacrificed due to tobacco consumption. Tobacco spending in households impacts the level of food quantity, which consequently affects the health of all household members, especially children.5 We also find that spending on
tobacco crowds out spending on recreation for low- income and middle- income households. The estimated effects on spending on health, transport and communication are not statistically and economically significant. Tobacco expenditure positively affects the budget shares on bars and restaurants and alcohol, as well as spending on coffee and sugary drinks, in line with previous research,30–33 37–39 creating a negative effect on nutrition balance and healthy lifestyles. The results by income groups mostly reflect those for the full sample. Despite the above limitations, this study adds to the empirical evidence on the adverse effect of tobacco use on household welfare. The crowding out effect of tobacco use negatively impacts the economy as a whole, implying reduced investment in human capital development. The estimated household budgetary effects indicate that strengthening and accelerating tobacco control policies is necessary to reduce the consumption and spending on tobacco since it would enhance household- level and population- level well- being, especially of the most financially vulnerable groups of the society. Moreover, the estimated positive effect of tobacco spending on budget shares on bars and restaurants might indicate the issue of the smoke- free policy not being effectively implemented. Twitter Mirjana Cizmovic @IseaMne and Violeta Vulovic @v_vulovic
P atna).