By taking 31 provinces (municipalities/autonomous regions) in Mainland China as the object of research, and using the data on urban population and built-up area of each region from 2005 to 2019, this paper measures the dispersion coefficient of population urbanization and land urbanization in each region through models and visually expresses the level and type of imbalance between them to reveal the temporal and spatial characteristics of imbalance. The results of the research show that since China’s state-owned land was sold through bidding, auction, and listing, the overall urbanization of the population and land development have become unbalanced. There is obvious regional and category difference in imbalance between population urbanization and land urbanization. The degree of imbalance increases from the central, eastern, northeastern to western regions. The remaining 29 regions are generally lagging in population urbanization except for Beijing and Hebei province. This imbalance is mainly caused by China’s dual household registration system, dual land system and the asymmetrical tax distribution system between financial rights and administrative rights. 1. conclusions are as follows:
First, in the process of rapid urbanization, population urbanization in most provinces of
Mainland China lags behind land urbanization, and population urbanization and land urbanization are in a state of inconsistency. From the perspective of spatial distribution, there are obvious regional differences, which shows a trend of increasing imbalance from central, eastern, northeastern, and western regions, while the imbalance being most serious in the western region. Second, the author’s preliminary research on the characteristics of population urbanization
and land urbanization imbalance in 31 provinces (municipalities/autonomous regions) in Mainland China is helpful in order to understand the temporal and spatial characteristics of population urbanization and land urbanization imbalance at the national level. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0287366 June 30, 2023 13 / 16
Third, the research data is mainly from the China Statistical Yearbook. The growth rates of
urban population and built-up areas in some provinces and years are negative. This is different from the common understanding. Due to limited personal ability, it is impossible to verify the macro data. Finally, the regional differences between China’s population urbanization and land urbanization are mainly caused by China’s dual household registration system, dual land system and the asymmetrical tax distribution system between financial rights and administrative rights.