Information about individual behaviour is collected regularly by organisations. This information has value to businesses, the government and third parties. It is not clear what value this personal data has to consumers themselves. Much of the modern economy is predicated on people sharing personal data, however if individuals value their privacy, they may choose to withhold this data unless the perceived benefits of sharing outweigh the perceived value of keeping the data private. One technique to assess how much individuals value their privacy is to ask them whether they might be willing to pay for an otherwise free service if paying allowed them to avoid sharing personal data. Our research extends previous work on factors affecting individuals’ decisions about whether to share personal data. We take an experimental approach and focus on whether consumers place a positive value on protecting their data by examining their willingness to share personal data in a variety of data sharing environments. Using five evaluation techniques, we systematically investigate whether members of the public value keeping their personal data private. We show that the extent to which participants value protecting their information differs by data type, suggesting there is no simple function to assign a value for individual privacy. The majority of participants displayed remarkable consistency in their rankings of the importance of different types of data through a variety of elicitation procedures, a finding consistent with the existence of stable individual privacy preferences in protecting personal data. We discuss our findings in the context of research on the value of privacy and privacy preferences. conclusions about how much individuals value personal data in general cannot be ascertained. Exceptions to this mainly investigate the comparison between willingness to accept and willingness to pay [e.g., 12] or between different types of willingness to pay [e.g., 10] but still with the same pieces of personal information. However, different types of data—for example energy use at home versus bank transactions—can reveal different information about an individual, and these different revelations may be sensitive to different extents. There is evidence that people care about some types of data more than others, and that people differ with respect to which types of data they care about [21, 22]. Arguably, then, the value of personal data is not a unified concept with a single value but is context-dependent and will vary by different types of data [3]. Further, consumers with the same underlying privacy preferences might make different decisions while sharing different types of data because the assessment of risks and benefits will be different in each data sharing environment. To summarise this literature, it appears that individuals are often willing to give up privacy
for benefits defined in terms of money and/or convenience, and that their willingness to engage in such trade-offs may differ between contexts where the risks and benefits of the trade-offs vary. This evidence is consistent with the idea that privacy preferences exist, that they are a component of the value of personal data, and that they may influence the decision whether to share personal data online, alongside other influences related to the decision context. However, an omission in the current literature is evidence about the stability and consis-
tency with which individuals can express their privacy preferences. If individuals’ stated preferences regarding their personal data are not consistent, stable and well-defined, then behaviourally-relevant models, in which online behaviour is governed in part by privacy preferences, will be intractable. Our paper aims to understand preferences for protecting personal data through assessing individuals’ rankings of the importance of protecting different types of personal data, including (but not limited to) analysing their willingness to pay to protect them. We next describe in more detail existing methodological work on the stability of privacy preferences, and draw on related literature in other contexts, to ascertain how best to capture the stability—or otherwise—of preferences. Preference elicitation across contexts
To understand whether people can consistently report their preferences, it is necessary to elicit these preferences in different ways. To our knowledge just one paper has compared different methods of preference elicitation in the context of online privacy. Benndorf and Normann
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0284581 May 3, 2023 3 / 21
[10] investigated the effect of two different methods in eliciting the value of personal information, comparing a Becker-DeGroot-Marshak style second price auction [23] with a Take it or Leave it approach. They found a significant difference in values between these approaches, even though both aimed to elicit the same underlying construct. Hence, they provided preliminary evidence that preferences to keep personal data private—at least in terms of their monetary valuations—are subject to elicitation method effects. To our knowledge no research has yet considered the (in)consistency with which individuals express their preference ranking over the importance of protecting different types of personal data, and whether those rankings depend on elicitation methods. However, evidence about the stability and reliability of preferences expressed through different elicitation procedures has been considered in detail in other fields, most notably in experimental economics and in the non-market valuation literature applied to health outcomes. Methods that exist to categorise and compare the strength of preference over different out-
comes come in many forms, from simple choice tasks through to complex trade-off tasks between the outcome and some numeraire of its value [for reviews comparing methods in the health context, see 24; 25]. One important way to categorise these methods is by their relative or absolute nature. Relative tasks allow a researcher to elicit the order—and sometimes the strength of preference—for one outcome compared to another. Examples include direct ranking tasks, where a participant must rank outcomes in order of preference, and binary choice tasks where one option is compared to another and the preferred option is chosen. Absolute tasks require participants to reveal the strength of preference for an outcome by itself without reference to any alternatives. For example, with rating scales an outcome is rated in terms of its quality, likeability or importance; while in valuation tasks an outcome is judged according to its monetary value. According to standard economic theory, as long as individuals hold well-defined and con-
sistent preferences over the outcomes in question, the type of task used to elicit these preferences should not influence the outcome of the preference elicitation. Put simply, if I like an apple more than an orange, then I would choose an apple over an orange in direct choice, and I would be willing to pay more for the apple than I would be willing to pay for the orange. However, a long and rich literature in experimental economics and psychology has revealed that choice and judgement tasks follow different psychological processes [e.g. 26] and prioritise different attributes of a comparison [e.g. 27]. It is therefore an open question whether individuals can consistently reveal their preference ordering with respect to the importance of protecting different types of their personal data. Arguably, the more well-defined their underlying preferences, the more stable the preference ordering will be when compared across different elicitation tasks. The health economics literature provides further evidence to support the notion that prefer-
ence elicitation procedures matter. Discrepancies between values of a health outcome have been found depending on the method used to elicit them [e.g. 24, 28–30]. There is a wide array of reasons given for these discrepancies, ranging from anchoring [e.g. 31] to reference point effects and coherent arbitrariness [32]. Taken to the extreme, some authors have argued that there may not even be such a thing as underlying, stable and coherent preferences [see for example 33–35 for various discussions along these lines]. There are striking similarities between valuing and ranking the importance of different health states, and valuing and ranking the importance of protecting different types of personal data. Both health states and personal data scenarios involve making judgements and choices that involve negative emotions like fear and distress. Both scenarios are relatively unfamiliar, in the sense that few people are regularly asked to directly evaluate different scenarios regarding their health, nor their privacy. Finally, both scenarios are difficult, arguably impossible, to incentivise, yet have important
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0284581 May 3, 2023 4 / 21
implications for regulation and policymaking. The UK Treasury’s Green Book guidance for policy appraisals states that
“If robust revealed preference data is not available, surveys that use willingness to pay and willingness to accept are an established alternative method known as stated preference techniques” [2, p. 42]. It seems wise, then, to draw on the lessons from health economics when considering the
value of personal data and preferences to keep the data private. We put the methods used in the health economics literature to work in the context of privacy valuation, checking for the implicit ranking of types of data that they imply, and inferring the plausibility of using these elicitation techniques to establish the value of personal data to members of the public. We focus on the comparison between rankings of types of data that are based on absolute judgment (willingness to pay) tasks, and rankings of types of data based on relative judgement methods, to understand the extent to which preference orderings for personal data are stable across these frames. We emphasise that we are not advocating for a market for personal data in which service
users are forced to pay for online privacy. The ethical implications of this possibility are complex and their detailed exploration is outside the scope of this research. Instead, and following the rich traditions of non-market valuation in other fields like health and the environment, we are simply using Willingness to Pay as a tool for establishing the value that individuals place on their personal data. In principle, this information can feed into regulatory processes, and in particular can provide an estimate of the benefits of privacy protection measures in cost-benefit analyses. In our setting, the values are captured to allow us to explore the stability of the expressed preferences, given that those preferences are not directly observable. In this study, we aimed to understand preferences for protecting personal data. Instead
of assuming preferences for privacy to be captured by an exogenously determined “privacy value” constant in the utility function in all contexts, we explored how preferences differ across different data sharing environments. We did not assume that preferences are well-defined and stable but used a multitude of elicitation techniques to explore the consistency with which different types of data are ranked and valued. Clearly, privacy is a complex issue that encompasses, and feeds into, many other related
concepts. We adopt a simple conceptual approach (illustrated in Fig 1) in which we assume that preferences for (online) privacy are a contributor to preferences for avoiding sharing personal data, but they not the whole story. The context of the data sharing scenario will also drive a preference for avoiding sharing personal data, but is not itself part of a preference for privacy. We further consider that Willingness to Accept (or Pay) for sharing (or not sharing) personal data online is driven in part by the preference for avoiding sharing personal data, and hence by preference for privacy, but that again other considerations may play a role, such as ability to pay. At the heart of the framework is the underlying preference for privacy, and the stability of these underlying privacy preferences are necessary (although not sufficient) for the consistency of decisions about sharing personal data, and this is what we explore in our empirical work. We took a neutral approach when defining the context in which participants were asked to
report the strength of preferences for keeping their personal data private, and we did not define the specific intended use of the information they were asked to share. Our study mimics real world online environments where individuals need to make their own assessment of costs and benefits associated with sharing of a particular type of personal data, and judge for themselves whether the trade-off is worth making. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0284581 May 3, 2023 5 / 21
Our approach does not intend to give a detailed exploration of the reasons behind the decision whether or not to share personal data, but instead focuses on examining two main issues: how individuals value keeping personal data private in a variety of contexts and how consistently they report these preferences. We explored the reliability and stability of these preferences taking a holistic view of the prospect of sharing personal data in the context of the digital economy and compared individuals’ overall willingness to share their data across personal data environments and elicited through different methods. Our research extends previous work on factors affecting individuals’ decisions about
whether to share personal data. We take an experimental approach and focus on whether consumers place a positive value on protecting their data by examining their willingness to share personal data in a variety of data sharing environments, including their Willingness To Pay (WTP) to protect it. Using five evaluation techniques, we systematically investigate whether members of the public value keeping their personal data private. Specifically, we determine (1) whether stated preferences for keeping personal data private are stable within individuals; and (2) whether stated preferences for keeping personal data private systematically vary between data sharing environments (e.g., electricity consumption vs physical activity monitoring vs spending patterns). We find that 96% of individuals are willing to pay to avoid sharing their personal data in at
least one of data sharing environments, indicating that privacy is valuable. We also find that individuals are consistent in their rankings of the importance of different types of personal data when these rankings are elicited in different ways. This is evidence consistent with the notion that the techniques we employ can reveal stable underlying preferences for keeping personal data private. We find consistent differences across our sample in their stated preferences for keeping different types of personal data private: financial and medical data were typically rated as the most important to protect, while supermarket loyalty cards, electricity use and physical activity data were rated as the least important to protect. We conclude that stability in stated preferences for keeping personal data private across a variety of elicitation methods is evidence that privacy preferences are well defined. If so, the stated preferences we elicit may
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0284581.g001
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0284581 May 3, 2023 6 / 21
help to explain how individuals may decide whether to share their personal data in the context of the digital economy. Finally, we draw conclusions on the links between our findings on willingness to pay to protect personal data in different environments with the literature on the value of privacy. experiment This paper investigates the stability of participants’ preferences for keeping their personal data private. In an online experiment, we asked whether participants place a positive monetary value on protecting different items of their personal data and explored how their willingness to pay differed between different data sharing environments. We drew inspiration from nonmarket valuation economic methodologies [e.g., contingent valuation, with its origins in 36; rating scales as explored in 31; paired comparison, which draws on insights from 37], designing tasks in which participants expressed their absolute and relative judgments about the importance of protecting different items of their personal data. Through these tasks we could establish whether and how people value the privacy of their online data, whether they value different types of data differently and whether there is consistency between the rankings revealed by different elicitation methods. To achieve the overall aim of understanding privacy preferences, the specific goals of our
research were twofold.  Using hypothetical stated preference tasks avoids this necessity by allowing us full control of the data sharing and payment scenarios and making it possible to ask about sensitive data types. Furthermore, it is not currently feasible to construct an incentivised study where these dif-
ferent types of personal data are traded. In our study we deliber-
ately did not define context and reasons for sharing personal data. We might also consider willingness to accept instead of willingness to pay: the literature on
the economics of privacy and security implicitly assumes that the market behaviour of individuals for both actions is identical, but related literature in psychology suggests otherwise. implications Finally, our results have implications for policy-making. Currently, the digital economy does not typically provide a direct monetary benefit for consumers who create personal data. The benefits are instead provided through increased convenience of service delivery, or better opportunities for accessing certain services. Largely, this relies on the assumption that the actual value of one consumer’s personal data is very hard to estimate and even if it is possible, the value is so small that consumers do not consider their personal data to be valuable enough to demand monetary compensation for sharing it. However, our findings, in line with previous research [see 3] suggest that there may exist an imbalance in power between the consumer and the data collector/holder in terms of the allocation of the welfare gain, whereby the consumer places a positive value on protecting their personal data and yet the welfare gain from the use of that personal data is allocated solely to the data handler. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0284581 May 3, 2023 18 / 21
Our results strongly suggest that privacy is not a unified concept and people make different
decisions depending on what kind of data they are sharing. The types of detriment that are experienced when data are not protected can be diverse—including privacy loss per se, risks of adverse consequences for the individual, and a basic disapproval of situations where a private company makes money from one’s own personal data. It is important to understand the preferences of members of the public towards all of these elements when making decisions about how to create and regulate a fair environment in which individuals are able to make informed choices about protecting their privacy. Similar to health economics where resources are distributed based on public evaluations of different health outcomes [2], arguably government regulations with respect to personal data and digital privacy should take account of the value of personal data privacy to society. Our study is the first to look at a breadth of different data types in terms of how they are evaluated by members of public, and we provide reassuring evidence in favour of the stability of preferences for online privacy. Our results therefore indicate how public preferences might be included in policy making in this important context. 