Introduction Healthcare expenditure, a common input used in health systems efficiency analyses is affected by population age structure. However, while age structure is usually considered to adjust health system outputs, health expenditure and other inputs are seldom adjusted. We propose methods for adjusting Health Expenditure per Capita (HEpC) for population age structure on health system efficiency analyses and assess the goodness-of-fit, correlation, reliability and disagreement of different approaches. Methods We performed a worldwide (188 countries) cross-sectional study of efficiency in 2015, using a stochastic frontier analysis. As single outputs, healthy life expectancy (HALE) at birth and at 65 years-old were considered in different models. We developed five models using as inputs: (1) HEpC (unadjusted); (2) age-adjusted HEpC; (3) HEpC and the proportion of 0–14, 15–64 and 65 + years-old; (4) HEpC and 5-year age-groups; and (5) HEpC ageing index. Akaike and Bayesian information criteria, Spearman’s rank correlation, intraclass correlation coefficient and information-based measure of disagreement were computed. Results Models 1 and 2 showed the highest correlation (0.981 and 0.986 for HALE at birth and HALE at 65 years-old, respectively) and reliability (0.986 and 0.988) and the lowest disagreement (0.011 and 0.014). Model 2, with ageadjusted HEpC, presented the lowest information criteria values. Conclusions Despite different models showing good correlation and reliability and low disagreement, there was important variability when age structure is considered that cannot be disregarded. The age-adjusted HE model provided the best goodness-of-fit and was the closest option to the current standard. conclusion Age structure (or proximity to death) influences health expenditure, which in turn is usually used as input of health systems efficiency analyses. However, while population age structure is usually taken into account to adjust health system outputs for efficiency analyses, health expenditure or other inputs are not often adjusted. This study proposes a method of integrating age structure for age-adjusted health expenditure and compares it with other approaches. Although different models showed relatively good correlation, reliability and low disagreement considering the efficiency scores obtained, there is important variability when age structure is considered that cannot be disregarded. The proposed model seems to be an interesting option for this methodological question, while further studies using different data and contexts can build on our results. Abbreviations AIC Akaike information criteria BIC Bayesian information criteria CI Confidence interval HALE Healthy life expectancy HEpC Health Expenditure per Capita IBMD Information-based measure of disagreement ICC Intraclass correlation coefficient PPP Purchasing-power parity SFA Stochastic frontier analysis.
