Green economic development is a new growth point for China’s economy. The reduction in environmental pollution and the practice of social responsibility are strongly advocated by society. ESG (environment, society, governance) is a new concept considering how companies achieve sustainable development. Do auditors pay attention to corporate ESG when making opinion decisions? This paper examines how ESG performance affects audit opinion decisions. The results show the following: (1) The better the ESG performance is, the lower the probability of a modified audit opinion on the part of the auditor will be. (2) Consideration of the auditor experience indicates that auditors who lack experience rely more heavily on information about a corporate ESG performance to make their opinion decisions. (3) The mechanism test demonstrated that a sound ESG performance improves the quality of its financial reporting, which, in turn, reduces the probability of the auditor issuing a modified audit opinion. These conclusions remain robust after considering a number of tests, such as changing variable measures and endogeneity issues. This research expands the study of the economic consequences of ESG from an audit perspective, providing new evidence regarding the importance that corporate management places on ESG performance and how market intermediaries use ESG information. 1. conclusions remain robust after considering a number of tests, such as changing variable measures and endogeneity issues. This research expands the study of the economic consequences of ESG from an audit perspective, providing new evidence regarding the importance that corporate management places on ESG performance and how market intermediaries use ESG information. 1. introduction Sustainable development is a global concern. An increasing number of countries are introducing policies calling for the inclusion of ESG (environment, society and governance) factors in the capital market investment decision system and requiring listed companies to voluntarily or mandatorily ensure ESG information disclosure [1]. Capital markets have responded to corporate ESG disclosure. For example, companies with a good ESG performance have better stock market returns [2], and institutional investors have a more pronounced preference for ESG investments [3]. Additionally, on the company level, a sound ESG performance can improve financial performance [4,5] and reduce financing costs [6] and operational risks [7,8]. Since a company’s ESG performance can signal effects on itself and market stakeholders, do auditors, as key intermediaries in the capital markets, pay attention to corporate ESG performance information? Does a sound ESG performance, for example, reduce the probability that an auditor will issue a modified audit opinion (MAO)? conclusions Non-financial information is an important consideration that influences the auditor’s opinion decision. Companies seek to obtain unqualified audit opinions due to the adverse economic consequences of MAO. However, previous literature has provided less research on how ESG performance enhances the result of the audit opinion. In this paper, we empirically examined the relationship between ESG performance and audit opinion using a sample of A-share-listed companies in Shanghai and Shenzhen from 2009 to 2020. It was found that the ESG performance of the companies is significantly and negatively correlated with MAO, verifying H1. Experienced auditors rely more on
professional judgment, while inexperienced auditors rely more on ESG rating content when performing audit work. Therefore, auditors’ experience attenuates the effect of ESG on audit opinion, verifying H2. We also explored the channel mechanisms through which ESG performance influences audit opinions. In the study, we found that ESG performance can significantly enhance the quality of financial reporting, which, in turn, influences the auditor’s decision, verifying H3. The results remained robust after replacing the measurement of the main variables. To alleviate the endogeneity issue, the following methods were tested: the Heckman correction method, PSM, addition of control variables and instrumental variables methods. The results remained significant. Our study makes a number of contributions to the literature. First, we expand the research on the economic consequences of ESG performance. Second, we enrich the literature on auditor experience by providing empirical evidence regarding the impact of auditor experience in moderating ESG information on auditor decision making. Third, our study contributes to the literature on the factors that influence auditor decision making. The research has some practical implications. First, research on the economic consequences of ESG provides empirical evidence that can be used to guide firms to consciously improve their information disclosure. To obtain better auditor feedback, companies must embrace ESG concepts in all aspects of their operations and management and focus on environmental, social and governance synergies. Second, by promoting the sustainable development of enterprises, the green and sustainable development of China’s economy can be achieved. Third, factors influencing audit opinion are studied to provide a reference for the auditor intending to issue an opinion. At the same time, auditors should enrich their professional experience and not rely excessively on ESG information to avoid misjudgment in their audit opinions. Fourth, investors should concentrate on the ESG performance of companies before making investment decisions. Companies with a better ESG performance are more likely to receive an unqualified opinion, which can establish a good social reputation for the company, so that it is expected to yield better sustainable returns. Since ESG information affects the auditor’s opinion decision, does it also affect other behavioral decisions of the auditor? More exploration can be conducted here to enrich the study of ESG information in regard to the auditor’s behavior