Abstract Background Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is one of the most common problems for preterm infants, and symptoms include tachypnoea, grunting, retractions and cyanosis, which occur immediately after birth. Treatment with surfactants has reduced morbidity and mortality rates associated with neonatal RDS. Objective The objective of this review is to describe the treatment costs, healthcare resource utilization (HCRU) and economic evaluations of surfactant use in the treatment of neonates with RDS. Methods A systematic literature review (SLR) was performed to identify available economic evaluations and costs associated with neonatal RDS. Electronic searches were conducted in Embase, MEDLINE, MEDLINE In-Process, NHS EED, DARE and HTAD to identify studies published between 2011 and 2021. Supplementary searches of reference lists, conference proceedings, websites of global health technology assessment bodies and other relevant sources were conducted. Publications were screened by two independent reviewers for inclusion and followed the population, interventions, comparators and outcomes framework eligibility criteria. Quality assessment of the identified studies was performed. Results Eight publications included in this SLR met all eligibility criteria: three conference abstracts and five peer-reviewed original research articles. Four of these publications evaluated costs/HCRU, and five (three abstracts and two peer-reviewed articles) investigated economic evaluations (two from Russia, and one each from Italy, Spain and England). The main cost drivers and causes of increased HCRU were invasive ventilation, duration of hospitalization and RDS-associated complications. There were no significant differences in neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) length of stay or NICU total costs between infants treated with beractant (Survanta速), calfactant (Infasurf速) or poractant alfa (Curosurf速). However, treatment with poractant alfa was associated with reduced total costs compared with no treatment, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) alone or calsurf (Kelisu速), due to shorter duration of hospitalization and fewer complications. Early use of the surfactant after birth was more clinically effective and cost-effective than late intervention in infants with RDS. Poractant alfa was found to be cost-effective and cost-saving compared to beractant for the treatment of neonatal RDS in two Russian studies. Conclusion There were no significant differences in NICU length of stay or NICU total costs between surfactants evaluated for treating neonates with RDS. However, early use of surfactant was found to be more clinically effective and cost-effective than late treatment. Treatment with poractant alfa was found to be cost-effective versus beractant and cost-saving compared with CPAP alone or beractant or CPAP in combination with calsurf. Limitations included the small number of studies, the geographic scope of the studies and the retrospective study design of the cost-effectiveness studies. 1 conclusions. Additionally, given that our review was more descriptive and exploratory and less inclined towards data synthesis, we did not follow the Synthesis Without Metaanalysis (SWiM) guidelines. Moreover, we cannot rule out the introduction of unknown bias in the decisions taken by the reviewers for screening, data extraction and quality assessment due to preconceived ideas, overemphasis on statistically significant results, or lack of transparency (no disclosure of biases). Other limitations of the study were that all economic evaluations included were retrospective studies, and one study reported an unlicensed dose of poractant alfa (70 mg/kg) [29]. 5 conclusion This SLR has provided a comprehensive review of the studies published in the last 10 years (2011 to 2021) reporting the costs, HCRU and economic evaluations of surfactants in the treatment of neonatal RDS. One study reported that there are no significant differences in NICU length of stay or NICU total costs between infants treated with beractant, calfactant or poractant alfa. Two studies reported lower hospital charges and treatment costs with poractant alfa alone versus beractant (n = 1 study) and poractant alfa with CPAP versus calsurf with CPAP (n = 1 study), respectively. While there was a limited number of studies identified in this SLR, one study assessing the comparative cost-effectiveness of different surfactants indicated that poractant alfa is cost-effective compared with beractant in the treatment of infants with RDS. One study reported that early use of the surfactant after birth was found to be more clinically effective and costeffective than late intervention in infants with RDS. Two studies reported that compared with CPAP alone, early surfactant administration with CPAP was associated with fewer complications and a lower overall treatment cost, resulting in an overall cost saving. Two Russian studies reported better cost-effectiveness ratios per life saved (n = 1 study) or prevention of death (n = 1 study) for poractant alfa compared to beractant. Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s41669- 023- 00399-x. 