In this article, we present a Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) to estimate the total cost required to control the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic by financial incentives. One of the greatest difficulties in controlling the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic is that most infected people are not identified and can transmit the virus to other people. Therefore, there is an urgent need to rapidly identify and isolate the infected people to avoid the further spread of COVID-19. To achieve this, we can consider providing a financial incentive for the people who voluntarily take the COVID-19 test and test positive. To prevent the abuse of the financial incentive policy, several conditions should be satisfied to receive the incentive. For example, an incentive is offered only if the recipients know who infected them. Based on the data obtained from epidemiological investigations, we calculated an estimated total cost of financial incentives for the policy by generating various possible infection routes using the estimated parameters and MCS. These results would help public health policymakers implement the proposed method to prevent the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the incentive policy can support various preparations such as hospital bed preparation, vaccine development, and so forth. 1. conclusions In this study, we present an MCS method for estimating the total cost required to control the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic through financial incentives. One of the greatest difficulties in controlling the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic is that there are infected people who are not yet identified and can transmit the virus to other people. Therefore, it is extremely urgent to rapidly identify and isolate the unidentified infected to avoid further spreading COVID-19. To achieve this purpose, we can consider providing a financial incentive for the confirmed people who voluntarily took the COVID-19 test and tested positive. MCS is used to generate infection network information, which can be found through epidemiological investigations in the simulation. In addition, to prevent the abuse of the financial incentive policy, several conditions should be satisfied in order to receive the incentive. For example, the incentive is offered only if the confirmed people should know from whom they became infected. Thus, we compared and analyzed three policies: a policy (P1) that pays equal compensation to everyone and policies that distribute compensation equally (P2) or unevenly (P3) to people who make up each chain of infection routes. The P2 and P3 policies can be expected to encourage voluntary COVID-19 testing of suspected patients who experience the symptoms and to help control coronavirus transmission. When distributing compensation unevenly, we proposed a policy to allocate smaller compensation by imposing penalties based on the number of people infected directly or indirectly by an infectee and the weight that adjusts the intensity of the penalty. The financial incentive considered for positive patients is financial support for cash types, e.g., gift certificates, etc. To estimate the total cost of incentives, the computational results using MCS based on real epidemiological data, instead of using a mathematical epidemic model for the COVID-19 pandemic disease, can help public health policymakers to implement and use the proposed method to prevent the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the
incentive policy is expected to prevent the spread of COVID-19, help prepare for various preparations, e.g., hospital bed preparation, vaccine development, compensate for the gap in economic activities caused by quarantine, and help recover from the economic recession caused by restrictions on business hours and group activities such as social distancing, etc. Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), C.L. and J.K.; methodology, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim) and J.K.; software, S.K. ; validation, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), Y.H., C.L., S.K. (Soobin Kwak) and J.K.; formal analysis, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), C.L. and J.K.; investigation, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), Y.H., C.L., S.K. (Soobin Kwak) and J.K.; resources, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), Y.H., C.L., S.K. (Soobin Kwak) and J.K.; data curation, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim); writing—original draft preparation, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), Y.H., C.L., S.K. (Soobin Kwak) and J.K.; writing—review and editing, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), Y.H., C.L., S.K. (Soobin Kwak) and J.K.; visualization, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim), and Y.H. ; supervision, S.K. (Sangkwon Kim); project administration, J.K.; funding acquisition, J.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: The corresponding author (J. Kim) was supported by the Brain Korea 21 FOUR from the Ministry of Education of Korea. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: Not applicable. Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to the referees whose comments greatly improved the paper. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. appendix a. matlab code of incentive Table A1 presents the reward for nm for each chain with w = 1 for the infection network shown in Figure 3. We provide the MATLAB code for the simulation of Table A1 from the website of the corresponding author: https://mathematicians.korea.ac.kr/cfdkim/opensource-codes/ (accessed on 27 November 2022). Table A1. In the infection network shown in Figure 3, the reward for nm of each chain was presented rounding off to the first decimal place with w = 1, and the numbers in parentheses are the number of people receiving the corresponding reward.