In this paper, we construct a multicommodity international trade spatial price equilibrium model of special relevance to agriculture in which exchange rates are included along with policy instruments in the form of tariffs, subsidies as well as quotas. The model allows for multiple trade routes between country origin nodes and country destination nodes and these trade routes can include differentmodes of transportation and transport through distinct countries. We capture the impacts of exchange rates through the definition of effective path costs and identify the governing multicommodity international trade spatial price equilibrium conditions, which are then formulated as a variational inequality problem in product path flows. Existence results are established and a computational procedure presented. The illustrative numerical examples and a case study are inspired by the impacts of the war against Ukraine on agricultural trade flows and product prices. The modeling and algorithmic framework allows for the quantification of the impacts of exchange rates and various trade policies, as well as the addition or deletion of supply markets, demand markets and/or routes, on supply and demand market prices in local currencies, and on the volume of product trade flows with implications for food security. 1 conclusions. 3 themulticommodity international trade spatial price equilibrium model Consider a network consisting of m origin nodes representing different countries in which multiple homogeneous products (commodities) are produced and with n destination nodes denoting possible demand points at which the products can be consumed, with each also denoting a distinct country. Each origin node i is connected to a destination node j via one or more paths, with a typical path denoted by p. Each path represents a trade route and consists of one or more directed links that join nodes in the network. 6 summary and conclusions International trade of commodities is essential to both producers and consumers. Various recent events of historical significance from the COVID-19 pandemic to Russia’s war on Ukraine have demonstrated the criticality of trade for the availability of various commodities. Agricultural commodities, in particular, are necessary for the well-being of people and their food security. In this paper, we take up the challenge of modeling the inclusion of exchange rates in a general spatial price equilibrium model of international trade. The model allows for multiple routes for commodities from origin countries to destination countries, and these routes, in turn, can consist of multiple transportation links through different countries. We show how
exchange rates affect costs on links and paths as well as supply prices, and formalize the definition of the multicommodity spatial price equilibrium with exchange rates and under policies such as tariffs, subsidies, and quotas on commodity path flows. The governing equilibrium conditions are formulated as a variational inequality problem in commodity path flows, and the existence of an equilibrium is established. The numerical examples, for which complete input and output data are reported, are drawn from Russia’s war on Ukraine, both illustrative examples as well as larger scale ones, which are solved using an implemented computational scheme. The flexibility of the modeling and algorithmic framework allows for the investigation quantitatively of the impacts of different scenarios with features of exchange rates plus various policies and the addition/deletion of markets and trade routes. The results strongly confirm the importance of efficient transportation routes for trade and also the benefits of subsidies for agricultural trade for both farmers and consumers.