conclusion Political uncertainty and governmental regulations have been found to impact the decision-making of residential and commercial real estate market participants (e.g., Ambrose & Diop, 2021; Luo et al., 2021; Suzuki & Asami, 2020; Asquith, 2019; Diamond et al., 2019a, 2019b; Monfared & Pavlov, 2019; Schuetz et al., 2011; Chau, 1997). However, no previous study has investigated the impact of governmental restrictions on the risk perception of commercial real estate investors. We fill this gap in the literature by using the COVID-19 pandemic as a natural experiment. In particular, we separate the pre-COVID period (2018/2019) from the COVID period (2020/2021), focus on shopping centers, which acknowledges the particularly strong impact of the pandemic on retail real estate (Hoesli & Malle, 2021; Ling et al., 2020; Milcheva, 2022; van Dijk et al., 2020), and proxy for COVID-related governmental restrictions based on the political affiliation of state governors. Using MSA-level going-in cap rates that reflect ex-ante risk premiums required by investors and thus their risk perception, we find that the COVID-19 pandemic yielded a risk premium compared to the pre-COVID period for neighborhood and regional
2 We obtain the data on MSA-level from Richard Florida (Bloomberg, December 4, 2020), based on U.S. Census Bureau data analyzed by Patrick Adler: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2020-12-04/ how-metro-areas-voted-in-the-2020-election. 1 3
shopping centers. However, in states with a Republican governor, which proxies for shorter and fewer governmental restrictions, investors required a lower going-in cap rate for regional malls during the COVID-19 period than in Democratic-led states. This provides evidence for the impact of governmental restrictions on the short-term risk perception of investors in a shopping center type significantly affected by mask mandates, social distancing, and store occupancy limitations, which in turn impacted the desire of shoppers to leisurely shop and eat out for extended periods. On the other hand, we find no effect for neighborhood shopping centers, which can be explained with the essential nature of their tenants (e.g., grocery stores). Further analysis suggests that mask mandates as a type of governmental restriction explain higher risk going-in cap rates, and that pandemic-related governmental restrictions have no impact on the long-term risk perceptions of retail investors. Last, we show that the political leaning of an MSA impacts the risk perception of investors. Explanations for this finding include the signaling effect of political attitudes about factors that impact future space and asset market conditions. Other studies could examine our findings on racial-ethnic diversity in more depth and use them as a starting point for analyzing other dimensions of diversity (e.g., socio-economic status, age, sexual orientation,
1 3
religious beliefs) and their impact on investor risk perception and commercial real estate market fundamentals. Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. Open Access 