The economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has effected the global economy, with the main changes expected to affect human life in the future, including food consumption. However, could this pandemic be assumed as a threshold for the suspension of the usual rules behind food choices? This review highlights the changes in food choice motivations before, during, and after the pandemic that have been reported in the literature to date to answer the research question on the changes in food choice motives caused by the pandemic to consumers worldwide. The review comes up with ten key food motives important for consumers, namely health, convenience, sensory appeal, nutritional quality, moral concerns, weight control, mood and anxiety, familiarity, price, and shopping frequency behavior; these motives continue to be significant in the post-pandemic era. Our findings indicate that it is too premature to give definite answers as to what food choice motives in the post-COVID-19 era will be like. Consumers’ perceptions and attitudes toward food in the new era are contradictory, depending on the country of the study, the average age, and the sex of the study group. These controversial results illustrate that, for food consumption, motives depend on the population being searched, with changes identified occurring in two directions. The definite answers will be given in three to five years when the new conditions will be clear and a number of studies will have been published. Even though it is too early to fully understand the definite food choice motive changes, defining a “new” index of consumer satisfaction is necessary since it can alter the food sale strategies of retail managers, food companies, and the other parties involved in the agri-food chain. 1. conclusions FCMs, based on the reviewed data, have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in certain ways, which are affecting consumers’ choice beyond the pandemic in the new economic era. Of the ten motives presented in this review, food price seems to be the most important motive for consumers during and post-COVID-19 periods and will be more significant if a global recession is under way. Decreased physical activity, as well as increased mental disorders related to stress and anxiety, had a negative effect on health, weight control, and mood and stress motives, along with increased food consumption, especially junk food. On the other hand, the lockdowns had a positive impact on other motives, such as convenience and familiarity, and a negative impact on shopping frequency motive, with increased online and takeaway purchase of foods. Food waste and its effects on the environment seem to be the parameters concerning motives such as ethics and nutritional status. Nutritional quality and sensory appeal are two consumer motives which have not been affected significantly by the pandemic. Raising consumer awareness of the incentives for food choice is of paramount importance in the new post-COVID-19 era where the world is changing drastically. Motivations, such as sensory appeal, taste, and food presentation, can act as a one-way street for emotional eating in the new era since they remain as important as before the pandemic. Family members, feeling secure and having high feelings of self-esteem when preparing a pleasant dish, bring the family together and create a context of daily stability, where people know what to expect with familiar dishes and can assess whether hunger and nutritional needs
will be met. In addition, price as an incentive for food choice becomes important due to uncertainty about work and economic future and a sense of impending precariousness experienced by affected consumers. Still, changes in food choice incentives have led to an increased awareness of food choices, with the aim of sustaining health through quality food, ensuring healthy eating behaviors and attitudes toward food waste, and meeting environmental footprint and ethical concerns. In addition, online shopping is a rising choice for consumers, a habit that has emerged due to home confinement and the demand for online shopping has increased significantly. Finally, could the pandemic be assumed to be the threshold at which the usual rules behind food choices are suspended? The definite answer will be known in three to five years when the new worldwide economic and social condition will be clear and stable, and an adequate number of studies will be published by then. In this review, we present the studies that have reported to date, with the above conclusions derived from their results so far. It would be more workable if consumers are encouraged to explore healthier food options, such as fresh fruits, vegetables, and whole foods. In addition, when purchasing foods, they should be informed about the foods and their beneficial properties (e.g., vegetables, fruits, and organic wine) and reflect more on the importance of certain foods to themselves and their families through their cultural identity. Online food shopping can surely contribute to a reduction in food waste thanks to the elimination of frenzied shopping routines at supermarkets or groceries and can open up space to new fields of study. On the other hand, defining a “new” index of consumer satisfaction can alter the sale strategies of retail managers and entrepreneurs. The present review, which is based on the findings reported so far, offers 10 specific propositions for each one of the 10 main food choice motives examined, which can be used as a practical and theoretical basis for the development of a “new” FCM index that can be used by retail managers, food companies, and any other parties involved in the agri-food chain. • Regarding the health motive, physical activity should be re-emphasized to return to normal conditions and consumers should be directed to healthy, rather than junk, foods after the pandemic. • Regarding the convenience motive, emphasis should be given to the purchase of takeaway foods and ready-to-go meals since they are going to be more and more in use by consumers in the new era. • Regarding the sensory appeal motive, no significant changes are predicted for consumers in the future. • Regarding the nutritional quality motive, consumers choosing their foods in the future will place more emphasis on their nutritional indications. • Regarding the ethical concern motive, consumers will consider food waste and environmental impacts more when choosing their foods in the future. • Regarding the weight control motive, an emphasis should be given to a balanced body weight with proper food selection for a healthy life, which can result in less disorders, after the pandemic • Regarding the mood and stress motive, a return to normal mental conditions, following the end of lockdowns, should decrease the unusual and dangerous increase in food consumption recorded during the pandemic. • Regarding the familiarity motive, consumers are going to use it as a major criterion to purchase food online in the future, and, therefore, it should be considered more carefully in the future. • Regarding the price motive, consumers are going to depend heavily on it for their selection and purchase of foods in the future, thus becoming their priority motive. • Regarding the shopping frequency behavior motive, consumers will avoid shopping in person in the future and turn more and more to online purchase and delivery of foods.