conclusions and recommendations This study utilised the WEF Nexus Index to analyse the WEF nexus in 54 African nations for whom sufficient data was available in 2019. Generally, African countries are performing sub-optimally in the WEF Nexus Index, appearing from the 44th rank in the global list. These sub-optimal performances are a key entry point for identifying challenges and planning intervention strategies for the continent and its member states. Deeper analysis at subnational levels and scales may (i) reveal spatial variations in dynamics of the WEF nexus at local scales, and (ii) inform potential for improvements in policy and practice within and between countries. At sector and indicator levels in the continent, variations exist in the security of the WEF nexus which necessitates contextualised analysis for countries and their subnational scales. Even at pillar and indicator level, African countries are performing poorly in all three fronts of resource security: water, energy and food. African countries with high water availability and low water access need to invest in the appropriate water treatment, distribution and supply infrastructure, while those with scarce water resources need to optimise on water use efficiency and productivity. Potential for enhancing energy security lies in the implementation of planned power generation projects, especially renewables across large, medium and small scales. A low ’hanging fruit’ for boosting power generation lies in optimising production in existing power plants through repair, maintenance and rehabilitation. Agriculture is the mainstay for sustaining livelihoods and catalysing economic growth in Africa and its development for production of food and fibre is inextricably connected to water and energy security. Recommended actions for enhancing food security in Africa include climate smart agriculture (CSA), agricultural water management, and soil fertility (nutrient) management for improved yields in line with the African Union’s Framework for Irrigation Development and Agricultural Water Management (AU-IDAWM). However, in all cases, planning and implementation of interventions seeking security of water, energy and food resources need to be conducted from a nexus perspective to optimise synergies and minimize trade-offs. The moderate correlation between the HDI and the WEF Nexus Index implies that food and nutrition security and service delivery in terms of access to freshwater, safe sanitation, and electricity greatly catalyse human development. For example, what additional local-scale indicators are required to ensure that its interpretation is more context-specific; or which policy outcomes meet the stated primary objective, i.e., supporting human well-being? 