The COVID-19 pandemic has completely changed the need for internet connectivity and technological devices across the population, but especially among school-aged children. For a large proportion of pupils, access to a connected computer nowadays makes the difference between being able to keep up with their educational development and falling badly behind. This paper provides a detailed account of the digitally deprived children in Europe, according to the latest available wave of the European Union – Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC). We find that 5.4% of school-aged children in Europe are digitally deprived and that differences are large across countries. Children that cohabit with low-educated parents, in poverty or in severe material deprivation are those most affected. 1 conclusions This paper provides a detailed account of the digitally deprived children in Europe. We use the cross-sectional form of the latest wave available of the European Union – Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC), which refers to 2019. To the best of our knowledge, this is the only database that records enforced lack, and it allows us to identify households that are digitally deprived
19 Detailed results at country level are available from the authors on request. 1331
1 3
Digitally Deprived Children in Europe
because of unaffordability. We consider lack of access to a computer and lack of access to an internet connection at home. We find that 1 child in 20 in Europe is digitally deprived, with substantial differences from country to country. For example, in Romania, 3 children in 10 live in digital deprivation. In Bulgaria, the figure is 2 in 10. Thus, we document an important problem of access to the tools necessary for education in today’s Europe: for many children, having a computer connected to the internet makes all the difference between keeping up with their education and falling badly behind. As a result, inequalities are likely to be exacerbated. Of the two items considered (access to a computer and internet access), inability to afford a computer is far more prevalent than inability to afford an internet connection. The phenomenon is particularly widespread in Southern and Eastern European countries, and it particularly affects children who live with low-educated parents, in a poor household and/or in severe material deprivation. Nonetheless, the heterogeneity of the characteristics that describe a digitally deprived child across countries is worth noting. For example, in Eastern Europe, having parents of non-European immigrant origin is not associated with a higher probability of being a digitally deprived child, whereas in the remaining country clusters it is. Computer and internet access can benefit children. Those who have access can be said to have a better opportunity to develop their interests, confidence and skills; as a result, these children and young people can benefit more fully from digital technologies, because they have both a better understanding of them and the opportunity to develop the digital competences required in today’s world. Digital exclusion can impose a burden on children in terms of inclusion and participation in the online environment. Access to ICT can also be important in terms of mental health, which has been found to be worse among those children who experience problems of digital exclusion (Metherell et al., 2021). Our study highlights the fact that access to a computer and to an internet connection are not guaranteed for all European children. It provides new findings on who these children are and where they live. In this way, we aim to contribute to the creation of evidence-based policies that can play a part in reducing the existing digital inequalities in access. Current and future policy efforts should target and support children who share the socio-economic characteristics associated with digital deprivation. If we want to achieve equality of opportunity in education, we should begin by providing equal access to education, which now implies having access to a computer and internet connection. Furthermore, schools, as a part of communities, carry an element of continuity; both in time of crisis and in the future, there exists the challenge of how to secure educational activities to support learning and continuity in children’s lives. Therefore, it is crucial for children to have access not only to the internet, but also to the digital tools that are essential for their education and that can further the development of their digital skills. Digital deprivation limits not only children’s access to information, but also their opportunity to develop the digital skills they need in the 21st century — technical, information, communication, collaborative, creative, critical-thinking and problem-solving (van Laar
1332 S. Ayllón et al. 1 3
et al., 2017). Furthermore, van Laar et al. (2017) remind us that ‘the dynamic changes in the types of jobs demanded by the knowledge society pose serious challenges to educational systems, as they are currently asked to prepare young people for jobs that may not yet exist’ (p. 584). Certainly, ensuring that children have access to digital technology in order to start developing these crucial digital skills is an important first step. Finally, our study is limited by the information included in the EU-SILC database regarding new technologies. This knowledge will allow governments to target areas of need and to develop appropriate legislation to combat deepening societal inequalities. 1333
Digitally Deprived Children in Europe

