Fair distribution of indivisible tasks with non-positive valuations (aka chores) has given rise to a large body of work in recent years. A popular approximate fairness notion is envy-freeness up to one item (EF1), which requires that any pairwise envy can be eliminated by the removal of a single item. While an EF1 and Pareto optimal (PO) allocation of goods always exists and can be computed via several well-known algorithms, even the existence of such solutions for chores remains open, to date. We take an epistemic approach utilizing information asymmetry by introducing dubious chores – items that inflict no cost on receiving agents, but are perceived costly by others. On a technical level, dubious chores provide a more fine-grained approximation of envy-freeness—compared to relaxations such as EF1—which enables progress towards addressing open problems on the existence and computation of EF1 and PO. In particular, we show that finding allocations with optimal number of dubious chores is computationally hard even for highly restricted classes of valuations. Nonetheless, we prove the existence of envy-free and PO allocations for n agents with only 2n− 2 dubious chores and strengthen it to n− 1 dubious chores in four special classes of valuations. Our experimental analysis demonstrate that baseline algorithms only require a relatively small number of dubious chores to achieve envy-freeness in practice. 1  7 conclusion We have proposed a novel epistemic framework for fair assignment of chores through the introduction of dubious chores and DEF-k, an approximate fairness notion of envy-freeness. Although finding DEF-k allocations with small k is computationally hard, as we have shown, we have provided several guarantees for the existence of such allocations with and without an additional efficiency requirement of Pareto optimality. Our experimental results suggest that the number of dubious chores required to make an allocation free of envy is lower in practice than our theoretical guarantees indicate. In particular, it seems possible
that there exists a DEF-(n−1) and PO allocation in every instance of chores allocation problem with additive valuations. acknowledgements We thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. Hadi Hosseini acknowledges support from NSF grants #2144413, #2052488, and #2107173. LX acknowledges NSF #1453542, #2007994, and #2106983, and a Google Research Award for support. a additional fairness notions In this section, we consider two stronger notions of envy-freeness with dubious chores: singly DEF-k (sDEFk), where each original chore can only be dubiously copied once, and personalized DEF-k (pDEF-k), where agents can only receive dubious copies of chores in their original bundles. These notions may be better suited in some of the potential applications as they provide natural bounds on the information asymmetry. In particular, the sDEF-k approach may be interpreted as two agents perceived to be sharing certain tasks while incurring equal cost, whereas the pDEF-k approach may be interpreted as agents perceived to incur more cost for the tasks they are already allotted. For both notions we show hardness results similar to those proved for DEF-k in Section 4. Definition 4 (Singly envy-freeness up to k dubious chores). An original allocation A is said to be singly envy-free up to k dubious chores (sDEF-k) if there exists a dubious set (not multiset) D and dubious allocation AD such that: (i) D consists of up to k, pairwise different, dubious chores copied fromM, (ii) the augmented allocation A∗ = A ⊎AD is envy-free. In other words, sDEF-k does not allow for multiple copies of the same chore. Definition 5 (Personalized envy-freeness up to k dubious chores). An original allocation A is said to be personally envy-free up to k dubious chores (pDEF-k) if there exists a dubious multiset D and dubious allocation AD such that: (i) D consists of up to k dubious chores copied from M, (ii) ADi consists only of copies of chores from Ai, for every agent i ∈ N , and (iii) the augmented allocation A∗ = A ⊎ AD is envy-free. In other words, pDEF-k does not allow for assigning a dubious copy of a chore to the agent that is not receiving the original chore in the original allocation. Example 5. Consider the chores instance I in Table 6 with n = 3, m = 4, and identical valuations. 