conclusions of this paper. Fourth, health and employment endogeneity issues, like the reverse effect of labor participation on health, are not considered. 3. results  3.1. descriptive statistics The labor participation rates, individual characteristics, and prevalence of disease among urban and rural women by age group are described in Table 1. Labor participation rate generally decreases with age. The rate is lower in urban women than in rural women and shows a significant downward trend at the age of 55, while the rate of rural women decreases more smoothly, from 84.1% at the age of 45–49 to 42.2% at the age of 70–74, with a total decrease of 41.9%. The rate of urban women plunges to 59.7% just after 55.With regards to health, it was found that PVWhealth index along with extremely good and relatively good self-rated health are gradually decreased with age, while the proportion of fair, bad, and extremely bad increased, so did most of the remaining health indicators. And the health status of urban women was generally higher than rural women. However, depression trended oppositely as depression levels decreased with age, which is consistent with the observation that subjective wellbeing or psychological health usually improves at older ages. The proportion of women aged 45–54 with secondary specialized education and above is relatively high, and there is an obvious downward trend after the age of 54, with the educational level of urban women being significantly higher than that of rural women, which is consistent with different generations of Chinese. The proportion of divorce and widowhood
increases as age increases, so the proportion of non-married women gradually increases. 3.2. regression analysis of women’s health and labor participation  3.2.1. regression analysis of women’s health and labor participation: women aged 45–74 Considering that women aged 45–49 have not reached retirement age and may not reflect the association between health and labor participation well, a regression was first conducted for all women aged 45–74. Table 2 demonstrates the results of the Probit regression between labor participation and health for women aged 45–74 based on all health variables in Model 1. The majority of health indicators were associated with labor participation. Worse health, one or more physical limits, numbers of ADL or IADL limitations equal to or above 1, multiple chronic conditions, disabilities, psychiatric conditions, and smoking were all associated with lower labor participation. However, CESD score, number of falls, and the consumption of alcohol were positively associated with labor participation, which could be due to a multiple covariance phenomenon caused by entering excessive health indicators simultaneously. To avoid such problems, health indicators were excluded in the baseline regressions of Table 3, which used the PVW index instead of a series of health indicators. Women who married, with rural residence, and with health insurance have higher labor participation, but the phenomenon worth noting is that highly educated women are associated with lower labor participation. 3.2.2. benchmark regression: women aged 45–49 In this study, three benchmark groups were introduced, the first one utilizes the Cutler traditional approach of including all women aged 45–49 as a benchmark. Column A in Table 3 demonstrates the relationships between labor participation and health among all women aged 45–49, indicating a positive relationship between health indicators and labor participation. Marriage and educational status were not statistically significant stratifiers in the younger age group. 3.2.3. Benchmark regression: Rural women aged 45–49
The second benchmark group of this paper is rural women aged 45–49, which is used to predict the excess work capacity of urban women. Column B of Table 3 reports the health and labor participation regression results of rural women aged 45–49. As can be seen, the PVW coefficient of 0.0078 is lower than that of all women in the 45–49 age group. The PVW index is a 0–100 percentile, with larger representing better health, so the regression coefficient of the PVW index for rural women aged 45–49 is lower than that of all women in the same age group, implying that rural women Chinese rural women’s work decisions are less responsive to health levels. As expected, rural women have a higher labor
participation rate, but their health level is worse, and therefore have lower PVW coefficients. 3.2.4. benchmark regression: rural women by age group The previous two benchmark groups used young cohorts. It is expected that, although the results can be more sensitive when using young cohorts as the benchmark, it is more likely to exaggerate capacity to work than when using women of the same age group as the benchmark. Columns C-G in Table 3 demonstrate the relationship between labor participation and health among every age group of rural women. Horizontally, PVW coefficients of rural women aged 45–59 gradually decreased, indicating that as rural women grew older, declining health had no significant impact on labor force participation, which proves that rural women tend to continue working as long as their health allows. The PVW coefficients of rural women aged 60–74 gradually increased, indicating that as rural women age further, and the relationship
between labor force participation and health status becomes more sensitive. Longitudinally, marriage and education level are statistically significant stratifiers in rural women of higher age groups. Unmarried or highly educated women are often associated with lower labor participation, so it is necessary to conduct further analysis of educational heterogeneity. 3.3. measurement of excess labor participation rate  3.3.1. all (urban and rural) women: benchmark of women aged 45–49 The results of the two-model measures of predicted work capacity and delayable work capacity for women in each age group were summarized in Table 4. Based on the regression results of the women aged 45–49 in Table 3, further predictions were conducted for women aged 50–74, on the subsequent measure of excess work capacity. The results of model 1 are still given in order to compare the two models. Actual labor participation rates of women aged 50–74 were high in all age groups, with 34.64% still working in women aged 70–74, however, the actual labor participation rate of urban women aged 70–74 is only 8.09%. As rural women account for nearly 80% of this study, the larger sample resulted in a higher labor participation rate for all women and a lower ability to excess work. Therefore, further measurements were conducted to stratify urban and rural women. It was found in model 1 that the excess
labor participation rates of rural women aged 50–54, 55–59, 60– 64, 65–69, and 70–74 were 4.34, 7.19, 11.12, 17.98, and 34.61%, respectively, while the rates of urban women in the same age group were 30.69, 50.19, 56.55, 64.50, and 67.19%, respectively, about 2–3 times higher than those of rural women. 3.3.2. urban women: rural women as benchmark The predicted results based on rural women aged 45–49 are displayed in Table 5, and the excess work capacity predicted based on rural women aged 45–49 is higher compared to that based on all women aged 45–49. The capacity of model 1 shows an increase from 32.51 to 36.94%. The capacity increases from 55.46 to 55.05% for urban women aged 50–54, and the capacity of model 2 is higher than that of model 1 by about 3% for all age groups. 3.3.3. urban women: rural women of di erent age groups as benchmarks Benchmarking exclusively on high labor participation rates of rural women aged 45–49 may overestimate the capacity of urban women. The second part of Table 5 compares the capacity of rural women with urban women at the same age and finds more conservative results for urban women, whose excess work capacity no longer increases with age, but decreases after reaching a peak of 45.95% at age 60–64. Frontiers in PublicHealth 07 frontiersin.org
Cheng et al. 10.3389/fpubh.2023.987362 heterogeneity analysis of educational level Delayable labor participation rates among women of different educational levels by age group are reported in Table 6. The largest capacity was obtained from the benchmark group of rural women aged 45–49, and the most conservative result was obtained from the benchmark group of illiterate women of all ages. In terms of the actual participation rate, women with higher educational levels tend to have lower labor participation rates, with the labor participation rates of women aged 50–54, 55–59, 60–64, 65–69, and 70–74 in secondary specialized education and above
being 64.27, 48.65, 33.85, 20.53, and 12.57%, respectively. The participation rate of illiterate women aged 70–74 was at 41.82%. As for estimated labor participation rates, differences among women with different educational levels were not significant, all around 60–80%. However, when comparing excess work capacity, illiterate women tend to be lower, while women with secondary specialized education and above tend to increase more distinctly with age. The excess labor participation rates calculated from all women, urban and rural women, and women with different educational levels, show the results of the PVW score model are similar with those of the full health
measurement of excess work capacity years Table 7 reports the measurement results of the PVW index model of women’s excess working years. When urban and rural areas are not stratified, it is found that the excess working capacity of all women aged 50–64 is only 2 years, and that of all women aged 50–74 is 5.1 years, therefore excess working capacity is not obvious. It may be that there are more rural women in the study, which leads to an increase of the “endless labor” sample, so the predicted excess working capacity is small. Subsequently, urban and rural women were calculated separately, and it can be seen that when taking all women from 45 to 49 as the benchmark, the excess working years in urban and rural areas from 50 to 64 are 7.2 and 1.1 years, respectively, and the excess working years in age group from 50 to 74 are 13.8 and 3.8 years, respectively. The excess working capacity of urban women is huge. Therefore, to further measure the excess working ability of urban women, different rural women groups were taken as the benchmark group. When using rural women aged 45–49 as the benchmark, the excess working ability of urban women aged 50–64 and 50–74 is 7.8 and 14.9 years, respectively. This was done to avoid overestimating the excess working ability of urban women. As expected, the benchmark for rural women in the same age group gives a more conservative result of 6.1 and 9.8 years of extra work for urban women aged 50–64 and 50–74, respectively. When measured separately in terms of educational level, it was found that the excess years of work were increased with increasing educational level. The increase was 3.5–4.8 years for women aged 50–64 with middle school and above, and 8.4–11.2 years for women aged 50–74, which illustrates that older women with higher educational level tend to possess higher work potential. 4. discussion The current policy reform on delayed retirement in China has not yet been implemented, and there are few studies on excess work
capacity based on health perspective in China. The excess work capacity of Chinese women was estimated using a Probit model by comprehensively assessing women’s health status using a variety of single health variables and PVW health coefficients. There is one study closely related by Cutler et al. who estimated the excess work capacity of the older workforce using data from 12 countries participating in the International Social Security Project (ISS), including the UK, Japan, Germany, and Italy, which conducted an international comparison (40). Unlike previous studies, this paper includes two new benchmark groups, young rural women in China and rural women in the same age group. Compared to Cutler et al. who took a single young cohort as the baseline group for their study, China, a developing country, has a special study context with urban-rural background differences and rural women with endless labor behavior (13, 47, 48). Rural women in China tend not to have a clear concept of retirement and will work if their health allows. Therefore, the use of the same age group of rural women as the benchmark group, ensures more accurate results than using a younger cohort and is less likely to have results that exaggerate the excess work capacity of older adults. Health level is associated with labor force participation among older adults. Older women with better health tend to remain in the labor force, which is consistent with previous research (49, 50). The effect of health on labor participation is not only manifested in selfrated health, but objective health measures such as chronic illness, ADL and IADL are significantly associated with labor participation (27). It is important to note that Chinese rural women generally have lower health levels than urban women. Previous studies have also demonstrated that rural Chinese women are far less susceptible to retirement due to health issues than urban women (47). In other words, rural women are more likely to continue working as long as their health allows until their health deteriorates (15). This phenomenon is common in China, but this idea often leads rural women with health problems to remain in the labor market and thus experience health deterioration, exacerbating urban-rural health inequalities (51). Given the gap between rural and urban areas, the government should provide appropriate assistance to
middle-aged and older women who continue to work in agriculture due to economic factors and improve social welfare policies for middle-aged and older rural women to narrow the health gap between urban and rural women. The retirement age should also be set to maintain proper consideration of women’s health levels and implement a flexible retirement policy (52). The results of this study also suggest there is an urban-rural heterogeneity in the excess work capacity of older women. Urban women have significantly higher excess capacity to work than rural women, but urban women with better health have much lower actual labor participation rates than rural women. This suggests that urban women have health levels to support delayed retirement, but it does not mean that urban women are willing to continue working after retirement or support delayed retirement policies. Many scholars have investigated women’s willingness to delay retirement and found that most urban women workers oppose delaying retirement (53). It is mainly due to two reasons, one is that urban women have better social security resources, they can get access to better social security services and benefits (54). In addition, the three-child policy is currently being advocated in China (55), due to China’s strong traditional intergenerational ties and the inadequacy of the current childcare system (56, 57), more and more women prefer to retire to care for their grandchildren to reduce the pressure on their children (58, 59). In the absence of social support, many women are physically and psychologically exhausted by family (60). Therefore, in the formulation of delayed retirement policies, urban-rural differences should be considered according to health status. For urban women, a corresponding retirement incentive should be established to encourage women in better health to remain in the labor market and provide certain subsidies (61), while supporting policies such as infant and childcare services should also be implemented one after another. The public welfare services for childcare to some extent can weaken the grandparenting responsibility and intensity of the older women and in turn can enable them to remain in the labor market and prolong their working life (62). Finally, educational heterogeneity was found in the excess
work capacity of older women. Excess work capacity increases
with education and the predicted working rate is higher for highly educated women, but the actual labor participation rate
is lower. However, in developed countries such as Denmark,
the extra work capacity of highly educated women is instead lower than that of less educated women (63). This shows there
is currently a huge labor potential for highly educated older
women of China. Along with Chinese women’s education levels
significantly rising (43), women’s initial age of entry into the
labor market has been delayed, while the retirement age has
remained the same implying that women are working fewer years (64). Furthermore, women with higher education are generally in better health, especially the older people (65), thus, women with more education are more capable of delaying retirement (66). Therefore, considering the characteristics of knowledgeable women with long years of education, high starting age for employment, abundant human capital stock, and generally better health, it is possible to take the lead in implementing a delayed retirement policy in medical, scientific research, and higher education sectors where knowledgeable women are concentrated (67), so as to make
reasonable use of human resources of highly educated female and gradually narrow the retirement age gap between males and women (52). 5. limitations This paper also has some limitations. First, this study is based on survey data from women aged 45 and above, which, although relatively representative, is the time women start to think about retirement and is not representative of the entire female population. Secondly, it is undeniable that the estimation method in this paper relies on many assumptions. For example, the endogeneity of labor force participation and health levels are not considered. Although multiple benchmark groups and different health measures were used to ensure the robustness of the findings as much as possible, given the importance of delayed retirement reform, we argue that more predictive research on the additional work capacity of the older population is still needed. Third, the delayed retirement age policy targets full-time workers, and the labor force participation behavior in this study is examined for both full-time and part-time women, and we hope that further distinctions can be made in future studies to better promote policy improvement. 6. conclusion China has announced a delayed retirement system, but the specific delayed retirement policy still needs to be formulated (8). As health is an essential factor affecting the employment of the older people (22), few studies in China have been conducted to explain whether the older population has sufficient health capacity to cooperate with implementing the delayed retirement policy from a health perspective. This study finds that older women in China still have some excess working capacity and room for delayed retirement based on women’s health perspective, which further enriches the measurement of retirement age and provides some theoretical support for the delayed retirement policy. As the health level of older women continues to improve, if the labor potential of older women can be further explored, it will help further mitigate the adverse effects of population aging and realize the positive aging strategy (52). However, the implications of delaying retirement age reform are broad and far-reaching.