The COVID-19 pandemic has caused economic and social upheaval across countries. The global economy suffered its biggest slump in four decades while the decades of progress in poverty reduction are now in reverse. However, the pandemic presents a window of opportunity for a greener world. In contrast to fossil fuel, renewable energy showed resilience throughout the pandemic, where the demand and investment in this sector continued to increase. The opportunity for a post-COVID-19 green recovery also comes from billions of government fiscal measures in response to COVID-19. Using the case of two emerging economies, Indonesia and Vietnam, this paper investigates whether the stimulus plans align with a country’s sustainable energy and climate targets. This study finds that despite ambitious country targets for green energy transition, these countries may miss opportunities for a green future due to limited fiscal measures directed to green recovery. The pandemic has exacerbated public fiscal budgets that may further limit the capacity to fund green projects. Amidst the uncertainty and challenges brought by the pandemic, it is critical to balance between promoting economic recovery and achieving sustainable energy and climate targets. To this end, the authors suggest several policy recommendations to achieve these targets amid uncertainty brought by the COVID-19 pandemic for emerging economies. 1. conclusions The main goal of the current study was to understand the stimulus plans launched by emerging economies and how it aligns with a country’s sustainable energy and climate targets. There has been growing optimism about the green recovery since the pandemic started especially considering the recovery plan launched by many major countries. Furthermore, the resilience of renewables during the pandemic fueled this optimism. Nevertheless, in the case of Indonesia and Vietnam, these two countries share similarities where fiscal measures directed to green recovery are limited. In sum, although these two countries have outlined ambitious targets toward clean energy targets, the pandemic would not accelerate the progress in achieving those targets. In fact, in the case of Indonesia, for instance, the country saw a drop in investment in the RE sector. The disruptions in the energy demand during the pandemic may be further complicated as Indonesia has already experienced an excess supply problem over the past few years. Similar to other emerging economies, this result may be explained by the fact that these two countries faced limited fiscal budgets that prevented them from focusing on the green recovery. In fact, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated public fiscal budgets where both countries experience widening fiscal deficits and increasing public debt. To address this problem, both countries have outlined plans for fiscal consolidation that may further limit the fiscal capacity to fund green projects required for achieving the green energy transition target. At the same, both countries also specify ambitious climate targets. Hence, a key policy priority should be to plan for these targets while coping with the limited and constrained fiscal capacity. This paper suggests four courses of action: green fiscal consolidation, green and sustainability bonds, green conditionality, and debt for nature swap funds.