Wine and tourism represent a perfect symbiosis, as they offer a different experience to tourists and also promote the economic, social, and environmental development of wine regions. In Spain, wine tourism is an increasingly important research field and several studies have been conducted on the role of wine routes in boosting the competitiveness of a territory, increasing wine production, improving the quality of life of citizens, and respecting the environment. However, to the best of our knowledge, the economic impact generated by these routes in Spain has not been addressed in the academic literature. To overcome this research gap, this paper aims to analyze the supply and demand of tourism activities by examining the evolution of the institutions involved in the Spanish wine routes, on the one hand, and the economic impact of these routes, on the other. The results show a sharp drop in the supply of institutions and the demand for tourist routes in 2020 as a result of COVID19, with a decrease of 2.58% in the total number of institutions adhered to the wine routes, a decrease of 73.53% in the total number of visitors to the different Wine Routes of Spain and a decrease of 74.7% in the economic impact compared to the previous year. Likewise, the research shows the existence of differences between the Wine Routes of Spain in terms of the number of visitors and their economic impact, which could serve as a guide for managers to make investments through acquisitions and/or their own investments in wineries located on the routes with the greatest economic impact.  vi. conclusions The results of this research are of special interest for the academic community, as well as for companies and professionals in the wine sector, as they improve knowledge about the Spanish wine tourism industry. In particular, the research contributes to a better understanding of the supply and demand of the Spanish Wine Routes, allowing to know the evolution of the member institutions and the economic impact of wine tourism in the wineries and museums of the Spanish Wine Routes. In this way, the research aims to fill a gap in the literature, as the economic impact of wine tourism activities in Spain has not been addressed in the academic literature. Spanish wineries have discovered the importance of wine tourism activities as a way to promote the image of their wines within and beyond their borders. Moreover, wine tourism is linked to other types of tourism, such as gastronomic, cultural and health-beauty tourism (wine therapy), thus allowing the generation of synergies derived from this linkage. The Wine Routes of Spain product, for its part, brings with it a series of potential benefits of various kinds for customers, entrepreneurs and the regulation of the system itself. Firstly, customers can obtain synergies in terms of being able to get to know the environment in which the product is produced and receive a more comprehensive and professional service. Secondly, for the entrepreneurs it means the creation of a strong and distinctive joint brand in the market, mutual assistance and collaboration, the exploitation of a growing and dynamic market niche, the de-seasonalisation of demand, the introduction of service quality systems, training, central purchasing and sales, promotion and joint marketing. Thirdly, the routes allow for the regulation of the wine tourism system, with the town councils, the regulatory councils and the entrepreneurs involved in the wine routes taking on the main role in the shaping and branding of the tourism product. One of the first conclusions to be drawn from the study is the major impact of COVID19 on the wine tourism industry, given that both supply and demand data show a sharp decline. COVID-19 has severely affected the Spanish wine industry, since, although there has been an increase in wine consumption in households, wine consumption through the Horeca channel, direct sales in wineries and wine tourism activity has been severely affected by the coronavirus (Marco-Lajara et al., 2021). Thus, as a consequence of the mobility limitations imposed during the COVID-19 pandemic, in 2020 there was a decrease in the total number of institutions adhering to the wine routes of 2.58%, a decrease in the total number of visitors to
188 Investigaciones Turísticas N° 25, enero-junio 2023, pp. 168-195
the different Wine Routes of Spain of 73.53% and a decrease in the economic impact of 74.7% compared to the previous year. The research shows the existence of differences between the Wine Routes of Spain in terms of the number of visitors and their economic impact. On the one hand, the Penedés Wine Route, the Marco de Jerez Wine Route and the Ribera del Duero Wine Route are the ones that generate the greatest tourist attraction, representing more than 40% of the total number of visitors to wineries and wine museums in the four years studied. This is largely explained by the fragmentation of wine tourism activity in the region into three different wine routes, given that if we were to take the data from the three routes as a single Rioja would be in the top three positions in terms of number of wine tourists and impact generated. These three routes cover the three sub-areas that make up the Rioja DO: Rioja Alta, Rioja Alavesa and Rioja Oriental. On the other hand, there is no positive correlation between the number of visitors to a given route and the economic impact of that route, since there are routes with a higher number of visitors but with a lower relative economic impact. This is due to differences in the price of the visit and the average expenditure during the visit. Thus, those routes that are able to charge a higher price and encourage greater consumption during the visit can generate a higher relative economic impact. In this context, the differentiating attributes of the Spanish Wine Routes tourism product make more sense than ever, since they are those that should guide the recovery of wine tourism activity after the crisis: authenticity, the link with the rural environment, the absence of overcrowding and the enjoyment of nature and local gastronomy. Among other factors that explain the asymmetric impact of the coronavirus on the Wine Routes of Spain analyzed, we can highlight some such as the wine tourism offer of their wineries, the geographical location and their proximity to large tourist centers, the tourist development of the destinations, the positioning of the destinations and their wines, or the communications to access these wine routes. The research also reveals the link between wine routes and quality labels, as well as the existence of large winemaking groups. On the one hand, the wine routes currently in existence come from DO-protected areas, given that of the 32 wine routes analysed, only in one case do their wineries come under the PGI distinctive. It is also worth noting the relationship between the routes with the greatest tourist and economic impact and the quality labels with the greatest market share, since of the four wine routes with the greatest tourist and economic impact (Penedés, Marco de Jeréz, Ribera del Duero, Rioja Alta), three belong to the DOs/PGIs with the greatest market share in terms of both volume and value (Rioja, Penedés, Ribera del Duero). On the other hand, the study highlights the company effect as a tourist attraction pole and, as a consequence, of wealth generation, given that the four wine routes that generate the greatest tourist and economic impact (Penedés, Marco de Jeréz, Ribera del Duero, Rioja Alta) have 7 of the 10 largest wine groups in terms of operating income. The first management implication derived from the research is that winery managers should join the wine routes where their wineries are located, since wine tourism activity under a wine route can provide several advantages, such as increased wine sales in the winery itself, improved reputation, and diversification of activities. For its part, the tourism observatory of the Wine Routes of Spain should provide constant information to the market on the characteristics of its wine tourism offer, encouraging activities to increase the notoriety of the collective brands it represents.