conclusions. Second, the findings indicate that opportunity beliefs and entrepreneurial actions alone are insufficient to fully account for the impact of opportunity co-creation on entrepreneurial performance. Subsequent studies should explore other mediating variables between opportunity co-creation and entrepreneurial performance. Third, this study did not discuss the extent of opportunity co-creation’s impact on entrepreneurial performance. Future studies should examine the impact of entrepreneurs’ personality traits on the relationship between opportunity co-creation and entrepreneurial performance to better understand the impact of opportunity co-creation on entrepreneurial performance. 5.5. conclusion This study set out to examine where the poor’s entrepreneurial opportunities emerge from and how opportunity co-creation relates to the success of poor entrepreneurs. Based on a review of the literature on entrepreneurial opportunity, opportunity co-creation, opportunity
beliefs, entrepreneurial action, and their relationship with entrepreneurial performance, we proposed that opportunity co-creation between poor entrepreneurs and the government would positively impact poor entrepreneurs’ opportunity beliefs and entrepreneurial actions, thereby affecting entrepreneurial performance. A survey was then carried out with entrepreneurs used to be poverty-stricken population in the Wuling Mountain Region. Structural equation analysis reveals direct positive impacts of opportunity co-creation between poor entrepreneurs and the government on entrepreneurial performance, opportunity co-creation on opportunity beliefs and entrepreneurial actions, opportunity beliefs on entrepreneurial actions, as well as opportunity beliefs and entrepreneurial actions on entrepreneurial performance. On the other hand, the indirect effects of opportunity co-creation on entrepreneurial actions, and opportunity co-creation and opportunity beliefs on entrepreneurial performance are also significant. Taken together, these findings suggest that the effect of opportunity co-creation on entrepreneurial performance is chain-mediated by opportunity beliefs and entrepreneurial actions. The empirical findings in this study provide a deeper insight into the link between opportunity beliefs and entrepreneurial behavior, while offering opportunity co-creation solutions for poverty reduction through entrepreneurship.