Based on 2010–2019 Chinese logistics listed companies as research samples, the paper used the binary Logit model measuring degree of financing constraints. The Kernel density function and Markov chain model are used to forecast China listed companies financing logistics dynamic constraints and business performance growth. Furthermore the stock of knowledge was chosen as a threshold variable to explore the impact of financing constraints on corporate performance growth of listed logistics enterprises. We find that the degree of financing constraints of logistics enterprises in our country has not been significantly eased. Corporate performance has not changed significantly and there are no obvious spatial gap and polarization with the passage of time. The impact of financing constraints on the corporate performance growth of logistics enterprises in China has a double threshold effect of knowledge stock, and has an inhibitory effect that first increases and then decreases. This is because in the short term, the investment of knowledge stock by enterprises can crowd out more corporate liquidity, and in the long run, it is related to the conversion rate of the knowledge stock itself. Because of the uneven regional distribution of resources and differences in the degree of economic development, there is a growing disincentive effect in central China as the stock of knowledge accumulates. conclusions support that financing constraints negatively affect the daily investment and business activities of enterprises. Most studies believe that knowledge stock promotes corporate performance. However, a few scholars have found that the knowledge stock will make enterprises path dependent, which will not be conducive to the improvement of enterprise innovation performance. At this stage, how strong is the financing constraint facing China logistics industry? And
what is the impact of financing constraints on the performance growth of logistics enterprises and how they are affected? Existing studies have paid less attention to this issue. Therefore, the paper selects the data of China logistics listed enterprises and constructs a financing constraint index to measure the degree of financing constraints of China logistics enterprises. The kernel density and Markov chain model are used to analyze and predict the dynamic evolution trend of financing constraints and corporate performance of logistics enterprises in China. The knowledge stock is selected as the threshold variable to analyze the panel threshold effect of financing constraints affecting the performance growth of logistics enterprises. Through the research in the paper, it is hoped that the performance of logistics enterprises can be improved and the adverse impact of financing constraints can be reduced. Research literature has shown that financing constraints negatively affect corporate perfor-
mance. Distinguish the nature of enterprises and observe the nonlinear relationship between financing constraints of China logistics industry and corporate performance growth. The study finds that the financing constraints of state-owned enterprises and private enterprises have a threshold effect of knowledge stock on the performance growth of logistics companies, and both show inhibitory effect of increases first and then decreases. However, private enterprises have more serious financing constraints, which are inseparable from the low attractiveness of private enterprises to talents, resulting in a low threshold for enterprise knowledge stock. To promote enterprise development, it is necessary to take attracting and retaining talents as a key path to improve labor efficiency. PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0285671 June 28, 2023 17 / 21 conclusions and outlook This paper uses the binary logit model to construct a financing constraint index to measure the degree of financing constraint of logistics enterprises. Kernel density and Markov chain model are used to analyze the dynamic change characteristics of financing constraints and business performance of logistics enterprises in China. Secondly, a panel threshold regression model is constructed to analyze whether the impact of financing constraints on the performance growth of logistics enterprises has a threshold effect of knowledge stock. Then, the heterogeneity analysis is carried out from the aspects of regional and enterprise ownership attributes, the difference of test results is compared, and the impact of financing constraints on the performance growth of logistics enterprises is explored. The main conclusions are as follows. First, the kernel density and Markov chain model are used to analyze the financing con-
straints and dynamic characteristics of corporate performance of logistics enterprises in China. The results show that the degree of financing constraints of logistics enterprises in China is decreasing from high to low. With the passage of time, the financing constraints of China logistics enterprises have been alleviated to a certain extent, and the spatial gap is not too obvious. And there is a "Matthew effect" in which the rich are richer and the poor are poorer. However, the performance of China logistics enterprises has not been significantly improved, and there is no obvious spatial gap and polarization. And it is difficult for China logistics enterprises to achieve and maintain a high level of corporate performance. Second, financing constraints have obvious negative impacts on the performance growth of
logistics enterprises. The development of the logistics industry requires the injection of social capital, and to solve the financing bottleneck of the logistics industry, it is necessary to alleviate the impact of financing constraints on the performance growth of logistics enterprises. Under the current economic situation, improving and developing a multi-level capital market is of great significance for promoting the high-quality development of logistics enterprises. Third, the impact of financing constraints on the performance growth of logistics enter-
prises in China has a double threshold inhibition effect on knowledge stock. With the increase of knowledge stock, there is a trend of first increasing and then decreasing. Similar characteristics exist in enterprises of different nature in China. Although logistics enterprises in different regions also have a double threshold of knowledge stock, the financing constraints in the central region have a restraining effect on the operating performance of logistics enterprises. With the increasing stock of knowledge, there is a growing trend. The reasons for the above results may be as follows. First, with the increase of the stock of
corporate knowledge, more funds need to be invested in the stock of knowledge in the early stage, so more corporate funds will be occupied, which will cause the company to face stronger financing constraints. From the perspective of the long-term development of enterprises, the transformation of knowledge stock formation results will alleviate the financing constraints of enterprises to a certain extent. The inhibitory effect of financing constraints on the business performance of enterprises is gradually decreasing, and it may even improve the business performance of enterprises. Second, the distribution of regional resources is uneven and there are differences in the degree of economic development. Therefore, as the stock of corporate knowledge increases, the central and western regions face more serious financing constraints. We should take a cautious look at the inhibitory effect of financing constraints on the operating performance of logistics companies in different regions, and distinguish the inhibitory effects of different threshold ranges, so as to adjust the stock of corporate knowledge, and then contribute to the alleviation of corporate financing constraints and improve corporate performance. Third, it is relatively easy for SOEs to obtain external financing. In terms of enterprise
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0285671 June 28, 2023 18 / 21
listing, bank credit, and government investment, state-owned enterprises have a good credit foundation. It is easier to get external support. State-owned enterprises have large financing and debt scales, so the financing constraints they face are not too serious. Since the use of working capital conforms to the law of diminishing marginal production, it is difficult to make full use of enterprise funds with relatively abundant funds. Due to their small scale, poor operating performance, insufficient commercial credit ratings, and few mortgageable assets, private enterprises are vulnerable to market discrimination, making it difficult to obtain external financing from the financial market. As a result, enterprises face more serious financing constraints, forming a vicious circle of enterprise development. The policy implications of this paper are as follows. To improve the high-quality develop-
ment of China logistics industry, we can support the development of enterprises by formulating policies to ease financing constraints. And formulate relevant policies to encourage logistics enterprises to carry out innovative research and development, and improve the knowledge stock of enterprises. In turn, it will form a driving force to promote the high-quality development of logistics enterprises. Second, the government should increase the formulation of preferential policies for enterprises in the central and western regions of China, and encourage enterprises to select locations in the central and western regions. Through these, we can promote employment in the central and western regions, and then promote the economic development of the central and western regions. In addition, private logistics enterprises are encouraged to innovate, and relevant subsidy policies are formulated to provide technical support to promote enterprise development and improve enterprise performance. With the progress of society and the rapid development of the economy and the Internet,
Chinese laws and regulations related to financing are constantly improving. The market environment faced by enterprises is also constantly changing, and it is necessary to keep up with the pace of the times and strengthen theoretical study and research. Combining the latest financing theory with the actual situation of the enterprise, formulate a financing plan that is more in line with the development of the enterprise. Therefore, it promotes the development of enterprises, and then promotes the high-quality development of the logistics industry. supporting information  s1 data. 