Finding solutions to the challenges posed by China’s urbanization is an urgent, pressing global concern. An effective approach for evaluating the ecological well-being performance (EWP) is a guideline for improvement. Most previous studies have focused on the evaluation of EWP efficiency without considering the effectiveness of the EWP, which may mislead the practice of improving the EWP. This paper proposed a bi-dimensional effectiveness and efficiency perspective evaluation of the EWP for pursuing sustainable development goals. The Ecological Consumption Index and the Human Development Index are selected to evaluate indicators for the EWP. The entropy method, lineweighted method, and four-quadrant evaluation framework are used to disclose EWP effectiveness. A Super SBM model and the DEA moving split-windows analysis method are applied to calculate the EWP efficiency. Data from 30 provinces in China for the period of 1997 to 2019 have been collected for empirical study to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The main findings of the case study are: (1) The ECI and HDI increased during the study period, while the annual average value of the EWP efficiency among 30 provinces in China has decreased with fluctuation; (2) provinces in southern China and Chongqing have a low level of ECI and demonstrate good performance in the HDI; and (3) most developed regions, such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangdong, have not presented the best EWPs. The results of this study can provide a basis for understanding the EWP in China so as to formulate targeted sustainable-development strategies. 1. conclusions An effective and proper approach to evaluating the ecological well-being performance (EWP) should be developed and employed. Most previous studies focused on the evaluation of the EWP efficiency without considering the effectiveness of the EWP, which may mislead the practice of improving the EWP. This paper proposed a bi-dimensional effectiveness and efficiency perspective evaluation of the EWP to sculpt sustainable performance. Using an input–output paradigm, an indicator system for assessing the ecological well-being performance (EWP) was established. To evaluate the EWP, the Ecological Consumption Index and the Human Development Index were chosen. Utilizing the entropy approach, the line-weighted method, and the four-quadrant evaluation framework, the effectiveness of the EWP was revealed. EWP efficiency was calculated using Super-SBM and the DEA moving split-windows analysis. The purpose of this study was to investigate the evaluation of the EWP from the perspective of a bi-dimensional view of both its effectiveness and its efficiency. In the meantime, it was decided to use the same indication system for determining the EWP’s effectiveness as well as its efficiency. The evaluation findings for the effectiveness and efficiency of the EWP can therefore be evaluated sideby-side. With respect to research methods, the weighting for the ECI evaluation through the use of the entropy approach was confirmed, and subjective evaluation variables were eliminated to the greatest extent possible. When measuring the output of residential well-being, it was more persuasive to use indicators of the HDI, which are considered to be internationally authoritative. The effectiveness of the EWP status across China’s 30 provinces was demonstrated using a four-quadrant evaluation methodology, which was utilized to illustrate the data clearly. The static DEA model was the only one that was capable of evaluating the relative efficiency of several DMUs over the same time period, which made it impossible to compare the evaluation results across other time periods. When working with panel data, the DEA moving split-windows analysis is a method that has been proven effective for evaluating a dynamic DEA. Data from 30 provinces in China for the period of 1997 to 2019 was collected for empirical study to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The main findings of the case study are: (1) the ECI and HDI were increased during the study period, while the annual average value of the EWP efficiency among the 30 provinces in China has decreased with fluctuation; (2) provinces in southern China and Chongqing had low ECI levels and good performance with respect to the HDI; these are the most sustainable regions in China from an EWP effectiveness perspective, and (3) most developed regions, such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangdong, did not present the best EWP values. This study evaluated the the ecological welfare performance in China from the perspectives of effectiveness and efficiency, theoretically improving the research on the EWP, and also promoting the development of the urban sustainability theory. From a practical point, this study provides an empirical study on the performance of 30 provinces over the past 20 years, which can provide a basis for understanding their performances in three aspects: energy consumption, human well-being, and the EWP, so as to formulate targeted sustainable-development strategies. The research limitation of this study is that the empirical data only extend up to 2019; and further improvement of the data can lead to empirical research in 2020, 2021, and 2022. With the development of multi-data, smaller units of empirical research can be carried out in the future. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2023, 20, 2024 25 of 29