Objective We aimed to empirically compare maximum acceptable risk results estimated using both a discrete choice experiment (DCE) and a probabilistic threshold technique (PTT). Methods Members of the UK general public (n = 982) completed an online survey including a DCE and a PTT (in random order) measuring their preferences for preventative treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. For the DCE, a Bayesian D-efficient design consisting of four blocks of 15 choice tasks was constructed including six attributes with varying levels. The PTT used identical risk and benefit attributes. For the DCE, a panel mixed-logit model was conducted, both mean and individual estimates were used to calculate maximum acceptable risk. For the PTT, interval regression was used to calculate maximum acceptable risk. Perceived complexity of the choice tasks and preference heterogeneity were investigated for both methods. Results Maximum acceptable risk confidence intervals of both methods overlapped for serious infection and serious side effects but not for mild side effects (maximum acceptable risk was 32.7 percent-points lower in the PTT). Although, both DCE and PTT tasks overall were considered easy or very easy to understand and answer, significantly more respondents rated the DCE choice tasks as easier to understand compared with those who rated the PTT as easier (7-percentage point difference; p < 0.05).  However, although this analysis focuses on a sample of data collected in the UK, the study was also carried out in Germany and Romania [24], resulting in similar findings with respect to respondent feedback and MAR differences (see ESM), which supports the theoretical validity of this study. Second, this study was conducted among a sample of the general population who were members of a survey panel and did not consist of respondents with impaired cognitive skills. In addition, the current sample consisted of a relatively large proportion of respondents with a high educational level and/or a high health literacy level. Therefore, the current findings cannot be generalized across all (patient) populations. Third, several assumptions had to be made for MAR estimations. These assumptions might to some extent impact on the outcomes generated. This is especially true for the functional from of the attributes included [34]. Further studies should explore the impact of study assumptions related to method selection, functional form of attributes, and the data analysis strategy on MAR study outcomes and MPLC decision making. Fourth, to determine the maximum risk participants were willing to accept within the PTT method, an open-ended question was added to the survey in case participants indicated that they were willing to accept the highest presented risks in the preceding threshold questions. This procedure was used to limit the number of threshold questions in the survey. However, the literature suggests that responses to open-ended
questions might provide a different threshold than one derived from bounded choice questions (e.g., [40, 41]). Because respondents whose MAR was greater than the highest level provided in the PTT exercise were allowed to state their MAR, this might have impacted the study results. Future research should be conducted to determine the best balance between estimating exact thresholds and determining upper bounds for acceptable risk levels in the PTT. Fifth, because a priori sample size calculations for DCE and PTT are complex, no formal power calculations were conducted. As a standard DCE includes about 100–300 respondents and a standard PTT include <100 respondents, this study oversampled and recruited 1000 respondents to ensure the responses provide enough information to identify preferences and allow comparisons across methods with acceptable precision. 5 conclusions Maximum acceptable risk estimates based on a DCE and a PTT were numerically similar with overlapping confidence intervals for two out of the three included risk attributes. With a 7-percentage point difference, the DCE was considered easier. This may suggest that the DCE is better suited in studies estimating MAR for multiple risk attributes of differing severity, while the PTT may be better suited when measuring heterogeneity in MAR estimates or when investigating one or more serious adverse events.