conclusions obtained by Ren et al. (51). In their paper, increased penalties are more conducive to the evolution of the system to the desired steady state when the government takes strict supervision as a long-term strategy, but they fail to consider that overly harsh regulation may not be conducive to the entry of market players. In addition, they neglect the influence of collusive behavior of service providers on subsidy strategy formulation, and thus they argue that subsidies help the system achieve the desired state under the cyclical subsidy mechanism. Also, the punishment and subsidy mechanism they proposed is static, which cannot be  dynamically adjusted according to the behavior choice of service providers. 7. conclusion Using evolutionary game theory and system dynamics theory, the supervision of local governments on private elderly care institutions is discussed in this paper. The results show that: First of all, when the local governments adopt the static supervision mechanism, the game behaviors of private elderly care institutions, local governments, and the public cannot reach a stable state, while when the local governments adopt the dynamic supervision mechanism, the strategy choices of the three parties’ game subjects will reach a stable state. Secondly, among these dynamic supervision mechanisms, although the dynamic penalty and static subsidy mechanism, as well as the static penalty and dynamic subsidy mechanism can make the strategy choice of private elderly care institutions reach a stable state, private elderly care institutions still have a certain probability to choose to provide low-quality services. Only when the local governments adopt the dynamic penalty and dynamic subsidy mechanism, will the private elderly care institutions choose to operate with complete selfdiscipline. Moreover, under the dynamic penalty and dynamic subsidy mechanism, the willingness of self-discipline management of private elderly care institutions is positively related to penalties and reputation gains-losses, negatively related to subsidies, and not related to supervision rewards. Reasonable adjustment of these
parameters can further optimize the dynamic penalty and dynamic subsidy mechanism. Thirdly, the government can first adjust penalties so that private elderly care institutions have greater stability in their strategic choices and reach stability more quickly. The government can also adjust the subsidies first to make the stability strategy of private elderly care institutions the most ideal. Although the results of this paper are reasonable and meaningful, there are still some deficiencies in parameters design. In fact, taxation and consumer guidance are also important regulatory tools of government. For future research, therefore, the punishment, subsidy, taxation, and consumption guidance will be  comprehensively considered, and the impact of the cross effects of various regulatory tools on the supervision of elderly care services will be analyzed. data availability statement The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author. author contributions YZ and QW: conceptualization and methodology. QW: software, validation, formal analysis, writing—original draft, and visualization. YZ and JL: resources, writing—review and editing, and supervision. YZ: funding acquisition. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. funding This research was funded by the Anhui Provincial Education Department of China (Grant Number: SK2021ZD0049) and The Optimization Theory, Algorithms, and Applications (Grant Number: 2023SK104). conflict of interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. publisher’s note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.