European farm households will face increasingly challenging conditions in the coming decades due to climate change, as the frequency and severity of extreme weather events rise. This study assesses the complex interrelations between external framework conditions such as climate change or adjustments in the agricultural price and subsidy schemes with farmers’ decision-making. As social aspects remain understudied drivers for agricultural decisions, we also consider value-based characteristics of farmers as internal factors relevant for decision-making. We integrate individual learning as response to extreme weather events into an agent-based model that simulates farmers’ decision-making. We applied the model to a region in Eastern Austria that already experiences water scarcity and increasing drought risk from climate change and simulated three future scenarios to compare the effects of changes in socio-economic and climatic conditions. In a cross-comparison, we then investigated how farmers can navigate these changes through individual adaptation. The agricultural trajectories project a decline of active farms between −27 and −37% accompanied by a reduction of agricultural area between −20 and −30% until 2053. The results show that regardless of the scenario conditions, adaptation through learning moderates the decline in the number of active farms and farmland compared to scenarios without adaptive learning. However, adaptation increases the workload of farmers. This highlights the need for labor support for farms. 1 conclusion European farmers are embedded in complex socio-ecological systems. Their decision-making is influenced not only by restrictions set by farm production capacity, but they also have to comply with the guidelines lined out by the national and international subsidy schemes. Additionally, in the upcoming decades, farmers will face the challenge to adapt to changing climatic conditions that have long-term effects as well as abrupt extreme events that affect agricultural production. For this study, we integrated learning through climate change adaptation into the SECLAND ABM. In a novel approach, we linked the effects of extreme events (environmental) and value-based characteristics (social and economic) on farmers’ decision-making to integrate learning as socio-ecological process into the model. This allowed us to use the particular advantage of agent-based modeling and simulate the effects of learning on socio-economic farm structure development as well as its spatial impacts on landuse dynamics across diverse future scenarios. From the scenario analysis, we conclude that adaptation has a positive impact on both the number of active farms and the agricultural area in 2053. However, successful adaptation does not necessarily mean a shift to an irrigation system, which is an infeasible solution in small-scaled, or grassland-dominated farming systems. We identified organic and extensive farming as successful and well-established adaptation strategies to climate change. Our results also depicted that adaptation was accompanied by an additional increase of the already high workload
for farmers. Furthermore, the comparison of the results against the socio-politic framework conditions revealed the limited scope of financial incentives. We identified the need for agricultural subsidy schemes that increase the scope of action for farms, by supporting them in workload reduction in the long run. To increase the resilience of farms and achieve successful long-term shifts towards sustainable development paths in agriculture, individual and societal efforts must complement each other.