This study examines the impact of economic policy uncertainty (EPU) and ecological innovation on carbon (CO2) emissions in a panel of 18 developed countries from 2005 to 2018 using second-generation time-series panel data techniques. We use three robust long-run estimators, namely two-stage least squares (2SLS), panel generalised method of moments (GMM) and generalised least squares (GLS), to resolve heterogeneity, endogeneity and simultaneity in the panels. We further performed causality tests to ascertain the direction of causality between the variables. Our estimations suggest three innovative findings. First, economic growth contributes significantly and positively to CO2 emissions; however, this happens at an optimal level of growth after which carbon emission reduces, indicating that our sample exhibits an inverted U-shaped environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) relationship. Second, the impact of EPU on CO2 emissions is diverse: high levels of EPU have a significant influence on CO2 emissions only in high-polluting countries but not in low-polluting ones. Thirdly, research and development (R&D), foreign direct investment (FDI), urbanisation and renewable energy (RE) usage were also found to have varying effects on CO2 emissions. These findings highlight the heterogeneous relationship between carbon emissions and economic indicators even in advanced economies, as the pollution haven hypothesis (PHH) holds true in high-pollution countries while the pollution halo effect holds for low-pollution ones. A key policy implication of this work is that the quest to mitigate emissions should not be a one-size-fits-all approach because not every country’s urbanisation rate, FDI inflows, R&D and renewable energy consumption directly affect CO2 emissions in the face of economic policy uncertainties. conclusions in the existing literature on the relationship between EPU and carbon emission are not entirely conclusive. There is thus the need for further investigation using other functional econometric forms and new data variables as additional controls. This is where our paper adds to the debate by filling some of the voids. Figure 1 is our conceptual framework, illustrating the relationship between economic policy uncertainty and CO2 emissions.  Specifically, our sample countries have stringent environmental regulations that do not permit outmoded production practices and seek cleaner technologies inflow into their countries and green investments. This finding supports the study of Wang et al. (2020a). The significant driver of carbon emissions with the intense effect is economic growth – because the quest to increase output requires energy usage; meanwhile, demand for non-renewable energy far exceeds renewable energy. Therefore, the increase in energy demand in the pursuit of higher output leads to carbon emissions in the long run. However, we observed that carbon emission diminishes when economic growth reaches its optimal level. Specifically, we substantiate the existence of the environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) hypothesis in our sample. This is in agreement with studies from Chen and Mkumbo (2020), Fethi and Rahuma (2019), Kapusuzoğlu (2014), Khan et al. (2020), Mensah et al. (2018) and Vitenu-Sackey (2020). Notably, we observed that urbanisation proportionally relates to carbon emissions. We contend that the rise in energy demand in urban areas results from migration and human activities increment. This suggests that any further increase in the urban population could increase economic activities that demand energy usage. In contrast, a decrease in urban population growth could reduce energy demand, leading to a reduction in carbon emissions. Some scholarly works agree with our finding – that urbanisation positively leads to carbon emissions significantly (Mensah et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2017). After dividing our sample into sub-samples of highpollution and low-pollution countries, we discovered that the magnitude of the impact of economic policy uncertainties varies; when economic policy uncertainty is high, high-pollution countries appear to have a downward effect on carbon emissions, whereas low-pollution countries appear to have no effect. To put it another way, the economic consequences of policy uncertainty vary significantly in terms of their impact on carbon emissions. R&D, foreign direct investment, urbanisation and renewable energy use all have varying effects on carbon emissions under periods of high economic policy uncertainty, with negative consequences in low-pollution countries but positive benefits in high-pollution countries. According to these findings, the pollution haven hypothesis (PHH) holds true in high-pollution countries. In contrast, the pollution halo effect holds in low-pollution countries, as Ahmad et al. (2021b, a) claim, highlighting the heterogeneous relationship between carbon emissions and economic indicators. 1 3 conclusion and policy implication Our study focused on assessing the impact of ecological innovation and economic policy uncertainty on carbon emissions from 2005 to 2018 in a panel study of 18 developed countries. To achieve this objective, we employed second-generation econometric techniques such as CIPS and CADF unit root tests, cross-sectional dependence tests and cointegration tests. We utilised robust techniques for the long-run estimations, including two-stage least square with cross-sectional SUR and panel corrected standard errors (PCSE), generalised method of moment with crosssectional SUR and panel corrected standard errors and generalised least square with correlation disturbances methods. The preliminary results from the unit root and cointegration tests exhibited stationary and cointegrated data series, while all the variables except two could not substantiate evidence of cross-sectional dependency. In line with this, it required the use of the aforementioned long-run estimators to resolve that issue. Our empirical analysis concludes that to mitigate carbon emissions, ecological innovation should be increased to avert any economic policy uncertainty that might derail the fortunes of emission mitigation. We can aver that the increasing carbon emissions level requires burgeoning ecological innovations to curtail it – through an increase in research and development and patent application registrations while reducing energy intensity from non-renewable energy sources. Notably, we discovered that the impact of economic policy uncertainty on carbon emissions is diverse. High levels of uncertainty significantly influence carbon emissions only in high-pollution countries but not in low-pollution ones. In the same way, R&D, foreign direct investment, urbanisation and renewable energy usage all have varying effects on carbon emissions. On the other hand, economic growth, patent applications and energy intensity, with a few exceptions, have a symmetric relationship with carbon emissions, regardless of the country’s features. In line with this, we assert that the quest to mitigate carbon emissions should not be a one-size-fits-all approach because not every country’s urbanisation rate, inflows of foreign direct investment, R&D and renewable
energy consumption directly affect carbon emissions in the face of economic policy uncertainties. Considering the findings from our study, we suggest some policy implications: Firstly, the positive relationship between patent, research and development, energy intensity and carbon emissions implies that carbon emissions abatement require numerous ecological innovation. Therefore, research and development should be prioritised towards green technologies and development due to their positive relationship with reducing carbon emissions. This is because the increasing carbon emission level requires more sustainable research and development. Therefore, policymakers should liberate their technological and innovation economies to improve innovation in mitigating carbon emissions. Moreover, energy-saving policies should be promoted to reduce the intensity of non-renewable energy consumption. Secondly, governments should spread development equitably to every place in their countries to curb urban migration to ease the urban infrastructure burden. Moreover, economic activities should be available in every place, devoid of the level of the place. Even though urbanisation leads to massive development – it also hurts the environment. Increasing demand for economic activities and other basic needs would hamper the environment through greenhouse gas emissions from production and consumption. Finally, we suggest that cleaner technologies be employed in production, and strict environmental regulations should be ensured. Moreover, the cost of renewable energy should be subsidised by governments to increase patronage. Overall, we confirm the occurrence of aggregation bias and advise that, regardless of a country’s level of development, governments should adjust the stringency of environmental legislation for foreign and host country enterprises based on their environmental performance. It would be a cost-effective approach to get their country on the environmental and economic sustainability pathways.