In 2020, with a substantial decline in tourist arrivals slightly before the time of COVID-19, the innovative econometric approach predicted possible responses between the spread of human microbes (bacteria/viruses) and tourist arrivals. The article developed a conceptually tested econometric model for predicting an exogenous shock on tourist arrivals driven by the spread of disease using a time series approach. The reworked study is based on an autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model to avoid spurious results. The periods of robust empirical study were obtained from the data vectors i) from January 2008 to December 2018 and ii) from January 2008 to December 2020. The data were obtained from the National Institute of Public Health (NIPH) and the Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. The ARIMA model predicted the number of declines in tourist arrivals for the approaching periods due to the spread of viruses. Before the outbreak of COVID-19, pre-pandemic results confirmed a one-fifth drop in tourist arrivals in the medium term. In the short term, the decline could be more than three-quarters. A further shock can be caused by forecasted bacterial infections; less likely to reduce tourist demand in the long term. The results can improve the evidence for public health demand in risk reduction for tourists as possible patients. The data from the NIPH are crucial for monitoring public health and tourism management as a base for predictions of unknown events. 1. conclusions  6.1. theoretical implications The proposed research is based on econometric prediction modelling using time series. The study’s relevance is shown in the Figure in Appendix D, in which the United World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) forecasts world tourism trends as linear and without shocks, which can be less realistic. The challenge is how to promptly predict a quantitative event, a surprise, and the period in which it can be expected. Accordingly, the main goal of the research was achieved, with the help of relevant data, to predict specific shocks in the future before they become a reality. Synthesised, we explored how different forecasting models or modelling approaches, including time series and econometrics, can be applied to additional secondary data. Therefore, the research contributes to the econometric model for predicting links between health events and tourist arrivals as crucial for economics, public health, and management sciences. As a novelty, this study spotlights and outlines the empirical attempt
that has used a conventional time series methodology with the applied ARIMA and VECM models to predict shocks due to microbes. Therefore, this is the first attempt and research that confronts microbes and tourist arrivals using an approach based on secondary data properties. The predicted decline in tourist arrivals in 2020, supported by the presented econometric model due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic viral infection in Slovenia, is 75.43%. The result is confirmed by the latest report from Eurostat [41] with an overall decline in tourist arrivals, which is 40%, mainly by foreign tourists. On the other hand, some bacterial infections cannot necessarily cause a decline in tourist arrivals. Despite their presence, there can even be an increase in tourist arrivals. The bacteria that were obtained and escalated in ARIMA are E. coli and Campylobacter. Besides the more publicly known bacterium Salmonella, which has no statistically significant effect on tourist arrivals in Slovenian tourism, both bacteria could be present in water and food. Their incidence is often limited to a particular hotel and restaurant or similar tourist dining and accommodation venues. Especially in private dining spaces like apartments, open fireplaces (BBQ), and Airbnb accommodations, the above bacteria could frequently spread, especially in warm weather [43]. 6.2. managerial implications The tourism industry should cooperate and network with the health system(s) and similar services that tourists can use. This can be supported by employee awareness and education improvements, accurate information, and designated first-aid spots for tourists (e.g., sign-posted meeting points). Therefore, the research results have a significant scientific, managerial, quality, policy, and practical implications relevant to tourism management: each tourist could be a potential patient. Thus, H1 is confirmed. Endmost, COVID-19 will likely be under control after four years of its appearance, while other threats to tourist demand will remain [48]. Lessons learned are in raising awareness of the importance of spotting the meeting points in health centres and disseminating the information on health prevention measures in accommodations and other tourist/guest facilities. Data from the NIPH are critical for monitoring public health and tourism management in predicting unknown events. Therefore, among future research issues is using the existing differentiated secondary health care data instead of the conduction of surveys and interviews widely used in public health research. To our best knowledge, none of the literature has shown signs of approaching the pandemic. Therefore, this article fil the gap to use historical data to analyse and discuss the possible risks in the future. These issues are of most importance for managers, policymakers, and practitioners in professional development in profit- and non-profit-oriented organisations. Moreover, non-government organisations could reach the goal of dissemination of such analyses. Therefore, this research adds some important insides to traditional tourism demand research [53–55] and country-specific research [56]. 6.3. future research The NIPH data for 2021 and 2022 are not yet available. As a result, the proposal for additional research in an ex-ante health crisis is a prediction that could introduce new viruses. The COVID-19 pandemic was not initially included in the study and pre-effect forecasting during the observed period (2008–2018). This was because a new virus had not yet spread throughout the population. However, as this article demonstrates, testing pre-effect predictions can be helpful for policymakers and practitioners. It makes use of historical data. 6.4. conclusions in short Our research, motivation, and relevance are essential to the tourism and health sectors. The usual drivers of demand and supply were constraints during the pandemic when each tourist could potentially be a patient. Therefore, the idea behind the study was to test whether the host country’s microbes significantly impact the spread of diseases among tourists using advanced econometric methods. Since April 2020, most Slovenian tourist destinations have had increased domestic tourist arrivals. Therefore, the study has answered the question that microbes affected tourist arrivals before the COVID-19 pandemic. In other words, viruses have a negative and statistically significant effect on tourist arrivals in the forecasting period for 2019 and 2020. On the other hand, the subsequent period shows a positive and significant impact on E. coli and Campylobacter. Therefore, the initial research hypothesis cannot be rejected. Hitherto, the next period has positive vibes for tourism demand and public health. Finally, the results’ reliability is examined across a broad time horizon up to 2020. The data on the COVID-19 virus has been added (Appendix B). To determine the significance of microbes on domestic and international tourist arrivals, a model is tested inside distinct country-specific tourist arrivals. The academic ramifications include: first, defining pre-effect forecasts using secondary data, and second, emphasising the usefulness of econometrics in the management, monitoring, and predictions of events relevant to health policy. To sum up:
• The first examined period (2008–2018) forecasted a decline in tourist arrivals due to viruses. Each infected person in the destination country (e.g., Slovenia) affects a decline in 41.81 tourists. On the other hand, E. coli and Campylobacter have opposite consequences on tourist arrivals. Each person infected by E. coli in the destination country (e.g., Slovenia) modified tourist arrivals by a rise of 3807 persons and by Campylobacter a rise of 21,061 travelers per month; • The second studied period (2008–2020) confirms the robustness of the predicted results. This is presented in several ways. First, the overlayed images (Figure 3) show the expected and actual outcomes. Second, the wave in tourist arrivals in 2019/2020 using the ARIMA and VECM modelling procedure was exactly predicted, which validates the choice of variables and methods. The decline in 2020 was 75.43%. Finally, the expanded and split analysis is presented in Appendix B. These results confirm the forecasted wavering in tourist arrivals.