In order to address the environmental impact of building carbon emissions, some developed countries have established certification standards for green housing. However, in many other countries, the green housing and the traditional housing may coexist in the market, and consumers’ willingness to buy the green housing can be different. This paper constructs a duopoly game model that includes a green developer and a traditional developer considering the heterogeneity of consumers’ green preferences and studies how mandatory green standards and subsidies affect the green developer’s pricing decision, profits and the carbon emission reductions of the green housing. The results show that when the marginal cost of green technology is high, raising green standards will hurt the green developer’s profits. Therefore, fiscal subsidies should be considered. The green developer obtains higher profits when subsidizing green consumers. The effectiveness of increasing carbon emission reduction is better when subsidizing the green developer and how to subsidize depends on the cost structure of the green housing. In addition, subsidizing green consumers and the incremental cost of green housing can improve the policy effect of green housing standards. Therefore, a mixed policy of subsidies and green standards can also have a good effect. 1. conclusions, for example, when the incremental cost of the green housing is high, raising the green housing standard is ineffective. The use of financial subsidies has a positive effect on reducing carbon emissions and promoting green housing, among which, subsidizing green consumers is more beneficial to the green developer’s profits, and subsidizing the green developer has better effectiveness on carbon emission reduction. In addition, subsidizing green consumers and subsidizing the incremental cost of green housing can improve the policy effect of green housing standards. Therefore, a mixed policy of green standards and government subsidies can be implemented. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. We sort out the literature related to our research in Section 2 and present a problem description as well as model setup in Section 3. In Section 4, we study the equilibrium solutions of the two models without government subsidies. In Section 5, we study the equilibrium solutions of the two models with government subsidies and study the impact of different policies on green developer’s profits and the policy effectiveness on improving carbon emission reduction. 
CERC, CERG and CERN refer to carbon emission reduction when subsidizing green consumers, subsidizing the green incremental cost of GD and no subsidies, respectively. It is proved in the conclusion of Section 4 that when θ2 < α, government subsidies are required. Therefore, the numerical experiments for CECMS and ERCMS are implemented based on θ2 < α. We assume that q1 = q2 = 3, c1 = c2 = 1.2 , n = 100 and α = 0.0032, θ1 = 0.003, θ2 = 0.002 in CECMS and θ1 = 0.002, θ2 = 0.003 in ERCMS (in order to make sure that θ2 < α). The result in Figure 6 shows that with the same subsidy rate, when subsidizing green consumers and subsidizing GD’s green incremental cost, the slope of the curve is higher than when there is no subsidy. When the green standard E is raised, the amount of subsidies for green costs is increasing. Meanwhile, subsidizing consumers has an overall impact, and the amount of subsidies will also increase as the green standard increases. These two subsidies can improve the problem mentioned in Section 4 of falling emissions reductions with increasing green standards when the greenness E is high. However, subsidizing GD’s basic cost cannot improve this problem. Subsidies for the basic cost can reduce the cost and selling price of the green housing, which will bring more utility to consumers. However, when the greenness E increases, the subsidy for the basic cost will not increase with the increase in greenness. There is no additional increase in the utility to consumers. 6. conclusions The green housing is receiving more and more attention as a kind of building that can cope with global warming by reducing energy consumption and carbon emissions. This paper fills the research gap of government subsidies in a duopoly residential housing market considering consumers’ green preferences. We construct an oligopoly market that includes a green developer and a traditional developer. A utility function including internal expectations and external atmosphere (consumers’ concern) is constructed to
describe the complex consumers’ buying behavior. By analyzing the results of different market environments and competition structures, suggestions for subsidies are drawn. First, when the carbon emissions of the green housing are less concerned, but the marginal cost of green technologies is high, with the improvement of green standards, the market share of the green housing declines. Although raising green standards can increase carbon emission reductions in the green housing when the green level is low, the profits of the green developer decline. Policies that only adopt green standards may be resisted. Second, government financial subsidies can effectively increase carbon emission reduction in the green housing and the green developer’s profit, among which, subsidizing green consumers is more beneficial to the green developer’s profits and subsidizing the green developer is more conducive to improving the carbon emission reduction in green housing. When subsidizing the developer of green housing, the effect of different subsidies depends on the cost structure. Subsidizing the main costs of a green developer has lower subsidy effectiveness. Third, government subsidies can increase the market share of green housing. When consumers are subsidized, the price of green housing is higher than that without subsidies. When the green developer is subsidized for its costs, the price of green homes is lower than that without subsidies. Finally, when a mixed policy of mandatory green standards and government subsidies is implemented, both subsidizing green consumers and subsidizing developer’s green incremental cost can improve carbon emission reduction feedback to mandatory green standards. However, subsidizing the base cost of the green developer has no such effect. Based on the above conclusions, we summarize some managerial insights as follows: (1) When the government subsidizes green consumers, the green developer should increase the selling price to obtain higher profits. (2) When the government subsidizes the green developer for its costs, it should lower the selling price to gain a larger market share and obtain higher profits. (3) Even if the subsidy amount is the same, subsidizing consumers is more beneficial to the green developer’s profits, so the green developer should strive for policies that subsidize consumers. We make some recommendations for policymakers as follows: (1) When financial subsidies are not available, raise the green standard only when the green housing is highly concerned. (2) If the main goal of the policy is to increase the green developer’s profits, green consumers should be subsidized, and a mix policy of subsidies and green standards can be implemented, which can have a better effect of carbon emission reduction than that without subsidies. (3) If the main goal of the policy is to increase carbon emission reductions, the green developer should be subsidized. When subsidizing minor costs, the subsidy efficiency is higher. (4) A mixed policy of subsidized green incremental cost and green standards should be implemented when the green incremental cost is low and a single policy of subsidizing the basic cost should be implemented when the green incremental cost is high. When modeling, we assume that consumers’ green preferences obey uniform distribution, which may be too idealistic and inconsistent with reality. We construct a Stackelberg game model, which is a dynamic game of complete information whose conditions may be difficult to satisfy in real business activities. We ignore the R&D cost of the green developer, which in reality may greatly influence the green developer’s decision making. Many conclusions are based on the assumption that the green housing and the traditional housing have the same basic cost and basic performance, which makes these two kinds of housing completely homogeneous except for greenness. In fact, many
green residential buildings are also high-end buildings except for the greenness, so there may be more differences between the two kinds of housing.