The aim of this study is to determine the effect of the three contexts of Computerized Accounting Information System (technological, organizational, and environmental) on construction companies’ economic performance. To achieve this aim, a survey was conducted on 208 construction companies that adopted CAIS with 152 valid responses received, representing a 73% rate of useable responses. The data analysis was carried out adopting the partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) technique. The results indicate that the technological and organizational context of CAIS had a positive significant effect on construction companies’ economic performance while the environmental context had a negative significant effect on construction companies’ economic performance. This research’s findings are significant to the practice of adopting CAIS technology on construction projects in developing countries since it provides the likely effect of the various contexts of CAIS on the economic performance of construction companies which will be beneficial for planning and decision-making to the construction companies’ management. Theoretically, the findings of this study will enrich existing literature by providing empirical proof of the variable effect of the various CAIS contexts on construction companies’ economic performance in Iraq which has not been considered in the existing literature. This study is limited to construction companies in Iraq. 1 conclusion This research was designed to investigate the effect of TC of CAIS on EP, the effect of OC of CAIS on EP, and the effect of EC of CAIS on EP. The results obtained show that hypothesis 1 (H1), and hypothesis 2 (H2) were supported, while hypothesis 3 (H3) was not supported. The findings of this research suggest that both the technological and organizational context of CAIS need to be adequately grounded in construction companies to guarantee optimal EP. Also, the negative relationship obtained in the relationship between EC and EP means that the current operating environment cannot yield a favorable economic performance outcome when CAIS is adopted. Therefore, the government and professional organizations are required to do more by way of enlightening the companies and creating a favorable framework for an economically viable CAIS adoption process. 7 limitations and future studies This research has a lot of strengths and was able to achieve its aim. However, there are a number of shortcomings that can be addressed in future research. First, quantitative method was used in this study and data were collected using a structured survey questionnaire. This restricts the respondents to the range of answers presented in the questionnaire. Also, this research was carried out in Iraq, a developing country in the west of the Asian continent. Therefore, its findings can only be generalized within this context.