Environmental regulations, once promulgated, can cause incentive conflict between manufacturers and suppliers. A manufacturer facing the regulation may undertake choices that can affect his sourcing decisions with the supplier. To analyze this, we develop a game-theoretic model considering a manufacturer who faces a per-unit carbon emissions cap and sources from a supplier. The manufacturer operates in a carbon sensitive market. We analyze the responses of the manufacturer and supplier and show that since the burden of carbon emissions cap is borne by the manufacturer, the first-best outcomes are not reached. Therefore, the supplier may offer different contracts to incentivize the manufacturer. We study two mechanisms: the two-part tariff and the revenue-and-investment sharing contracts. We show how such contracts achieve coordination and deliver efficient supply chain outcomes. Interestingly, we find that the contract preferences of the manufacturer and the supplier may not be the same and vary under different market conditions. Summarily, we highlight important considerations for the supply chain players in designing suitable incentives. 1. conclusion Carbon emissions norms are increasingly being used by policy makers globally to drive product greening initiatives. This, however, may lead to incentive conflict since the costs of adhering to regulations is borne by the manufacturers. In this the context, we consider a supply chain where the carbon cap applies to the manufacturer, who undertakes greening investments to reduce carbon emission of the product while procuring raw material from the supplier. We analyze the strategic decisions of the supply chain players and study the impact of various parameters on these decisions. We examine various contracts to coordinate the decentralized supply chain under carbon emissions cap. Our analysis demonstrates that the manufacturer strategically decreases the level of carbon reduction in a price sensitive consumer market, however, product greening enables the manufacturer to charge a higher selling price of the product. The study also shows that the manufacturer decreases the amount of carbon reduction and selling price of the product with an increase in green investment cost to maintain his profits. We determine regions based on the investment coefficient of the greening
initiative of the manufacturer and derive optimal carbon emission reduction decisions. We find that with increasing carbon reduction elasticity, the region in which the manufacturer provides more greening than mandated by government cap, increases. On the other hand, with increasing price sensitivity of customers, the region in which the manufacturer provides more greening than mandated by government cap decreases. The finding further suggests that stricter carbon emission standards force the manufacturer to increase the amount of carbon reduction and selling price. However, support by partners in the supply chain, namely, the supplier, can help reduce the cost burden for the manufacturer. Therefore, we propose a two-part tariff contract, and a revenue and investment-sharing contract to coordinate the supply chain. We find that both the contracts perfectly coordinate the decentralized chain. Our numerical results illustrate the impact of key parameters such as greening investment cost, price sensitivity, and carbon reduction elasticity on individual players and compare the supply chain players’ profits under two different contracts. We find that based on the market characteristics and greening costs, the preference of contract for both the supplier and manufacturer varies. In markets that require higher investment costs for greening or have higher price sensitiv-
ity, the manufacturer prefers a revenue and investment sharing contract whereas in markets in which the investment cost is low or price sensitivity is low, the manufacturer prefers a twopart tariff contract. Additionally, when the carbon reduction sensitivity is higher, the manufacturer prefers the two-part tariff contract whereas, when its lower, the manufacturer prefers a RIS contract. The above results have important implications for managers to design suitable incentives that can drive efficient supply chain outcomes. Our results also provide critical insights for social planners or regulators. We find that under stricter carbon emission norms the manufacturer increases the selling price to transfer the higher procurement cost and cost of greening to the consumer. This reduces consumer welfare. In these circumstances, a social planner may consider subsidizing the emission cost of the manufacturer or influence consumer markets to support green manufacturers. 7.1 future extensions Our study looks at a vertical structure consisting of a supplier and a manufacturer. This could be further extended to consider multiple manufacturers and suppliers and horizonal competition between them. Such an approach will provide an industry perspective when policy changes such as emissions cap apply. 