The recent pandemic crisis led to a drop in tourism, and it highlighted the connection between tourism, healthcare, environmental concerns and well-being. In this context, the purpose of the research is to clarify the relationship between tourism, happiness, healthcare and environmental expenditure. Statistical data provided by the World Bank, Eurostat and the World Happiness Database from the EU27 countries, from 2000 to 2019, were used. In order to investigate the relationship between these indicators, the panel Autoregressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) method was used. In the long run, happiness and environmental and healthcare expenditure have a statistically significant and positive impact on tourism arrivals and receipts. It follows that a 1% increase in happiness supports between 4% and 9% of international tourism, while a 1% increase in environmental expenditure supports an increase of 2% in international tourism. Additionally, there is a significant interaction between happiness and either environmental or healthcare expenditure in the long run. This means that increasing happiness diminishes the effect of the later on tourism arrivals and receipts. No short-term relationship was identified between arrivals and any of the above-mentioned variables. In the same context, healthcare expenditure has a negative short-term effect on tourism receipts. The research contributes to the literature by suggesting that increasing national happiness, healthcare and environmental expenditure has a beneficial spillover effect on tourism arrivals and receipts in the 1. 6. conclusions Tourism is a highly sensitive and flexible industry. It is affected by social, political, economic and environmental issues, stemming from poverty to political instability, economic crises and various natural disasters and pandemics. Despite all these grievous issues, tourism is not abandoned as an industry. It forges on and adapts to new contexts, to various new rules and regulations, and it transforms constantly not only to benefit the industry, but also to favor and develop the regions where it operates. In this context, tourism favors human communities and the environment, by protecting them and by increasing health, well-being and happiness. Together with legislators and various state institutions, the tourism industry aims to be not only profitable, but also sustainable, even at the cost of making important and costly changes to its operations. In this article, we analyzed the long-term and the short-term relationships between international tourism (measured by the number of tourist arrivals and by tourism receipts) and happiness, environmental expenditure and healthcare expenditure on a panel of the 27 European Union countries in the 2000–2019 time period, employing a panel ARDL model. The first step in our analysis was to normalize the data using the natural logarithm. After the data were normalized, we tested for cointegration using the Pedroni test, which showed the presence of cointegration. The results of the panel root unit tests show that the series of the variable HAPP is stationary at the level (significance threshold of 5%), while the series of variables ARRIV, REC, ENV and HEALTH are stationary only at the first difference level. Since the order of integration of these series is either I (0) or I (1), we used ARDL to determine both the short- and long-term relationships. Our research shows that happiness
has the greatest impact on international tourism, both on the number of arrivals and on tourism receipts, but only in the long run. Therefore, a 1% increase in happiness can support an average increase of 8% in international tourist arrivals in the long run, and an average increase of 6% in tourism receipts in the long run. According to the results in the short run, at the panel level, happiness does not influence international tourism. Regarding environmental expenditure, we found that it determines an increase in international tourism in the long run, i.e., a 1% increase in environmental expenditure, can support an increase of 2% in international tourism. Additionally, healthcare expenditure influences the number of arrivals, at the panel level, to a greater extent than environmental expenditure. Moreover, variation in happiness influences the effects of both environmental expenditure and health expenditure on the number of international tourist arrivals. A 1% increase in happiness leads to a decrease of 0.99% in changes in environmental expenditure and of 3.75% in changes in health expenditure and their effect on the number of international tourist arrivals. In the case of receipts, the impact is reversed. Thus, variation in happiness produces changes in the effects of environmental expenditure and health expenditure on tourism receipts. A 1% increase in happiness leads to a decrease of 1.03% in changes in environmental expenditure and their effect on tourism receipts, and to a decrease of 0.66% in changes in health expenditure and their effect on tourism receipts. Overall, the results of our research suggest that international tourists are more likely to travel to and spend more in countries that are happier and which invest more in the environment and public health. Moreover, if health, environmental quality and, most importantly, national happiness are seen responsibly by decision-makers and understood to be intangible assets influencing international tourism arrivals and revenue, they can form a basis for nationally significant strategies. These positive effects will not be limited to the tourism industry, destination areas and local and national budgets, but will spill over to the national economy and society as a whole, and most importantly, to the well-being of each individual. The policy implications of this study imply the necessity for national legislators to create political and economic environments that enable and facilitate investments in environmental protection and sustainability. Creating laws and regulations must be in accordance with tangible objectives, therefore allowing the tourism industry to flourish and become more sustainable, and also to become a factor of prosperity for local communities. Since traveling is a proven means through which exposure to nature reduces stress, and increases positive emotions, well-being and nervous balance, policies should favor increased mobility and the development of national parks and protected areas, together with the increase in green spaces (parks and vegetation), even in highly congested regions. Happiness and well-being are natural outcomes that favor productivity, travel and expenditure for increasing health, thus creating and sustaining an economic environment that supports local communities and a better understanding of the values that keep human beings in healthy relationships, both regionally and globally. In the present study, we encountered a number of limitations, specifically those related to obtaining a more comprehensive data set, in terms of the time period, that was large enough to be significant. Thus, considering the analyzed variables, the time period considered was reduced to 20 years.