Consumption is an important concept in economics and many social sciences. The aim of the study is to compare consumption in European households in the years 2004–2020 and to identify groups of countries with similar consumption–expenditure structures. Statistical methods were used: trend analysis, cluster analysis. Between 2004 and 2019, the consumption expenditures of European households gradually increased. In all countries, spending on categories such as food, housing maintenance, and food and accommodation rose. Most countries also saw an increase in spending on other categories of consumer goods and services, although there were also countries where some types of spending decreased during the period under study. Our research grouped countries according to their consumption structure in 2004, 2019 and 2020. In Europe, several groups of countries can be distinguished according to their consumption structure. Similarities between EU countries’ consumption change through time. Ward’s clustering and k-means methods allowed to reduce a large number of countries to a few basic groups, which can be perceived as the subject and direction of further analysis. 1. conclusions The conducted research achieved the research aim and answered the research questions. The first research question was: How did consumer spending in European households evolve between 2004 and 2019 and 2020? Between 2004 and 2019, the level of consumption expenditures in European households increased. Spending on food, housing, water and energy, cultural and recreational goods and services as well as catering and hospitality increased in all countries analyzed. Spending on other categories of consumer goods and services also increased in most countries. Seven European countries recorded a drop in spending on selected categories of goods and services between 2004 and 2019. In several countries (Ireland, France, The Netherlands, Italy, Cyprus), spending on telecommunications decreased. Expenditures on clothing and footwear declined in Greece, Spain and France, while expenditures on home furnishings and housekeeping decreased in Ireland and Greece. A decline in spending on goods such as clothing and footwear, as well as home furnishings, may be a symptom of consumers moving toward sustainable consumption, although this particular finding requires further analysis and research. The second research question was: How has the pandemic affected the spending patterns of European households? The answer to this was obtained by analyzing changes in the level of expenditure between 2019 and 2020 as well as differences in groupings of countries due to the structure of consumption. Turning to the analysis of changes in consumer spending, the following should be stated. In the first year of the pandemic, consumption spending decreased in all European countries. Spending declined in regards to almost all categories of consumer goods and services. Only spending on food and non-alcoholic beverages increased in most countries, the exceptions being Malta and Iceland. In particular, a decrease in spending was noted for the category of consumption needs related to socializing and gatherings. All countries saw declines in spending on food and hospitality, culture and leisure, clothing and footwear as well as transportation goods and services. In 2021, increases in spending were observed, both in nominal terms and in terms of the structure of spending on goods and services. The specific types of goods and services that had to be reduced during the pandemic period gained importance in that period. In response to another research question, Which European countries are similar in terms of the structure of household consumption expenditures? it should be stated that in Europe, several groups of countries can be distinguished according to their consumption structure. On one hand, there are countries with a low level of household consumption. The countries with a consumption structure that indicates a very low standard of living are Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The characteristic feature of the societies of these countries is a high share of food spending and low shares of spending on higher order goods spending. Another group of countries with a relatively high share of household spending on food and non-alcoholic beverages is Bulgaria, Croatia, Latvia, Romania and Serbia. The consumption patterns of societies from the countries mentioned above reflect a high share of spending on alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and telecommunications and, in addition, one of the higher shares related to transportation costs. The next group of countries includes the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary and Slovakia. In households in these countries, the share of food expenditures settled at an average level, as did expenditures on higher order goods. A characteristic feature of the societies of the countries analyzed in the research was a high share of spending on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products and a low percentage of spending on health. The next group to be distinguished in 2019 and 2020 included Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Poland and Slovenia. Characteristics of households in these countries include a high share of spending on transportation and other goods and services. In this cluster, Luxembourg society slightly deviates from other countries in terms of its consumption structure. A distinguishing feature, in this case, is the low share of food expenditures in Luxembourg households contrary to the average in the other societies. The next two groups of countries are characterized by significantly more favorable living standards. A relatively high standard of living was a characteristic feature of house-
Sustainability 2022, 14, 12794 21 of 25
holds from Denmark, The Netherlands, Austria, Sweden, Iceland Norway forming one cluster. The other group of countries included Belgium, Germany, France and Finland. Both groups had low shares of food expenditures, which, according to Engel’s law, confirms the favorable income situation in households from these countries. Low shares of spending in both groups were also recorded with regard to categories related to telecommunication and educational goods and services. A high share of expenditures on housing maintenance, water, energy and fuel was noted in both clusters, confirming Engel–Schwabe’s law according to which housing maintenance expenditures increase in wealthier households. The differences between the groups were related to the share of expenditures on health. The cluster represented by Belgium, Germany, France and Finland had a higher share of health expenditures. The following conclusions were drawn:
• Similarities in consumption between EU countries change over time. The relocation of countries is evident when comparing clusters in the period 2004 and 2019 and 2020. Several pairs of countries have always remained next to each other (in one cluster), i.e., (a) Italy and Luxembourg, (b) Finland and France, (c) Czech Republic and Slovakia, (d) Cyprus and Portugal, (e) Bulgaria and Latvia, and (d) Ireland and Spain. It was also noted that the cluster including Ireland and the southern European countries in 2004 represented the so-called “richer” region of Europe (higher living standards of the population), and the next two groupings represented the “poorer” region of Europe (lower living standards of the population). • Restrictions and lockdowns imposed during the pandemic changed household consumption patterns. The situation led to a reduction in the use of services, resulting in the reallocation of some “richer” European countries to the region of countries representing less favorable (in terms of living standards) consumption patterns. Dividing the 2004–2020 analysis period into two stages (2004–2019 and 2019–2020) in the study was justified, as the consumption pattern in the second stage was shaped by specific socioeconomic circumstances. • In methodological terms, the following claims can be formulated. Ward’s clustering and k-means methods allowed to reduce a large number of countries to a few basic groups, which can be perceived as the subject and direction of further analysis. Comparing consumption structures in groups (clusters) rather than in individual countries reduced workload and shortened the time required to conduct the analysis. The method used in the research provided the possibility of comparing multivariate objects, as each country was described by variables relating to 12 categories of expenditure on consumer goods and services. Ward’s and k-means clustering methods can be used as a tool to help divide Europe into regions characterized by different consumption structures. In the conducted analysis, there was a number of unexpected “exceptions,” such as a high degree of similarity between the structure of expenditures of Poland and the Western countries in 2019 and Luxembourg and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe in 2020, as well as Ireland’s stable position among Southern European countries. Analysis of partial shifts in the positions of countries during examined period offers further research potential. The presented results may constitute the basis for evaluation of economic development and also as an indicator of the impact of economic development in the standard of living of European households.