Due to unreasonable pricing, farmers have low enthusiasm for reclaiming their homesteads, which can be used to generate construction land quota. This paper studies how to design a feasible pricing mechanism to stimulate the enthusiasm of farmers. First, we analyze the practice that the local government gives the developers with quota the selection, the right to select the location of the land to be auctioned. Then, applying sequential auction theory, we propose firstand second-price sealed-bid sequential auction models and design quota auction pricing mechanisms. Through theoretical and numerical analysis, we obtain the equilibrium strategy and analyze the impact of selection and on developers’ bidding pricing on quota. The results show that the selection can enhance the developer’s quota bidding price and farmers’ income. And the higher the value of selection to the developer, the higher the quota bidding price and farmer’s income. Contrarily, the larger the number of developers, the smaller the quota bidding price and farmers’ income. Finally, the quota bidding price and farmers’ income in the second-price sealed-bid sequential auction are higher than in the first-price sealed-bid sequential auction. Introduction In order to ensure sufficient arable land for cultivating food, the Chinese central government has implemented a construction land quota system to limit the amount of cultivated land developed into construction land by local governments. Under this system, the central government grants a certain number of construction land quotas to local governments every year as planned, and each local government can only develop cultivated land within this specified quota. With the rapid advancement of China’s urbanization process, the demand for cultivated land development in cities has increased rapidly [1]. Although there are sufficient cultivated land resources in various regions, the central government plans to allocate scarce quotas. This can result in local governments having no right to develop arable land into construction land. A large number of development projects can thus be delayed or even canceled, hindering the progress of urbanization. At the same time, urbanization has attracted many people from rural areas into the cities, resulting in rural homesteads being left idle and causing a wastage of rural land resources. To solve this problem, Chongqing, Chengdu, and other cities, as well as a large number of domestic follow-up cities, have innovated the construction land quota system. conclusions and policy suggestions. problem and variables  problem In order to solve the problem caused by the insufficient construction land quota allocated by the central government, local governments encourage farmers to reclaim their idle homesteads to generate additional construction land quotas and sell them to developers in need. Consequently, to boost farmers’ enthusiasm for reclamation, the government uses auctions to sell the reclaimed construction land quota. At the same time, to increase the value of this indicator to developers, as well as the developer’s quotation, the local government gives the right of selecting the location of the land to be auctioned to the developer who has bought construction land quota from the government. In other words, the developer can select the land that best meets its needs from among the multiple the multiple alternative land provided by the government the multiple alternative land, and thereafter participate in its auction. A local government is preparing to auction a piece of urban construction land. However, it
lacks a quota for construction land. Therefore, the government encourages farmers to voluntarily reclaim the rural vacant homesteads into cultivated land to produce the construction land quota and through the sealed auction method to sell to the need of developers. Meanwhile, the government stipulates that the developer who has obtained the quota in the firststage auction has the selection to select the intended plot as the construction land in the second-stage auction, within the scope of urban planning and general land use planning. Then the government holds a second auction to sell the selected construction land to developers who also participated in the first auction. Moreover, the project can only be developed when the developer is able to acquire the construction land quota and the construction land simultaneously. Obviously, the value of the right of select is mainly reflected in the select of the expected
construction land [36]. Because the developer who wins the construction land quota can select the prospective land. On the contrary, the developer who fails to win the quota cannot select the prospective land. Therefore, developers who fail to win the quota value the land to be auctioned at a lower price than before. The main reason for the lower than the original evaluation is that the matching degree of the land is reduced. The higher the mismatch degree, the greater the degree of land discount, and the greater the value of the selection for developers. Thus, all developers are willing to pay a higher price for the construction land quota. variables According to China’s construction land quota system, the government can sell the construction land quota and construction land by auction. The developer who wins the construction land quota by auction has the right to choose the construction land. The use of the selection improvers the match between the land chosen by the developer and the construction land expected to be developed; that is, the developer can obtain higher utility [37]. Therefore, we establish a sequential auction model for construction land quota and construction land based on the Hedonic utility theory. The basic assumptions and auction process are as follows:
a. Assume that the risk-neutral seller (the Chinese government) sells two items by holding
two successive auctions. The first (second) stage is the construction land quota (construction land) auction. Furthermore, the construction land quota and the construction land value are not correlated. b. Assume that the total number of bidders is n. Bidder i2{1,2,. . .,n} has a utility function u: R+!R, which satisfies u(0) = 0,u’>0,u"<0.Each bidder pursues utility maximization and has independent private value. One may assume that bidder i’s valuation of the construction land quota is v1i and that of the construction land is v2i. These independently obey the uniform distribution on [0,ε] and [0,1] respectively, where ε<1, the distribution function is Fi( ), and the density function is fi( ). c. n risk-neutral bidders participate in the two stages of auction simultaneously and successively. The winner in the first stage holds the construction land quota, and can choose the
land in line with the urban, rural, and land planning as the land for their own construction project. Furthermore, they can participate in the second stage of commodity auction. Therefore, the loser F in the first stage has a land depreciation coefficient rL;Fj 2 ½0; 1  for the construction land. The land depreciation coefficient rL;Fj is due to the existence of the
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0263075 January 25, 2022 4 / 25
quota selection of the construction land. This makes the construction land auctioned in the second stage less matched with the construction land expected to be developed by the developer without selection. Therefore, land depreciation occurs. The smaller rL;Fj is, the lower the degree of matching between the construction land auctioned in the second stage and the construction land expected to be developed by the loser in the first stage. Furthermore, the higher the land depreciation will be for the developers who have no selection. Therefore, all developers are more willing to obtain the selection to obtain the competitive advantage in the second stage. Further, assume that the willingness to pay for the loser in the first stage is v2F ¼ rL;Fjv2F . The willingness to pay v2L for the winner of the first stage of obtaining construction land remains unchanged. Finally, the winner with the highest bid in each stage wins the goods in this stage. 