Nowadays, urban centers face the challenge to upgrade life quality by reducing traffic congestion, air pollution emissions and road casualties. Transport charging policies applied in cities at a quick pace are a key tool for sustainable mobility. However, public acceptability is an important precondition to be adopted for such policies. In this context, the scope of this paper is the investigation of the public acceptability of environmentally linked urban charging policies in Greek urban centers. Specifically, the paper’s objective is the investigation of Greek drivers’ acceptability of the implementation of a congestion charging policy and a parking charging policy with the charging being adjusted according to the Euro class and technology of the vehicle in favor of less polluting cars. A structural equation model (SEM) was developed using data from a questionnaire survey which provided a sample encompassing 733 respondent drivers from three main urban centers of Greece: Athens, Thessaloniki and Volos. Several statistical relationships were detected and quantified correlating the two examined urban environmental charging policies with five latent unobserved variables. Based on the results, public acceptability of environmental congestion charging policies and the public acceptability of environmental parking charging policies were found to be positively correlated with each other, meaning that a driver who supports one environmentally linked transport charging policy is more likely to support the other one as well. The environmental sensitivity and high commuting profiles of drivers are influential factors that positively affect the acceptability of the two examined transport charging policies’ implementation in Greek urban centers. Analysis has also shown that younger, higher-educated respondents and females are more likely to accept the environmental charging policies under consideration. 1. conclusions The paper’s objective is the investigation of Greek drivers’ acceptability of congestion charging policies and parking charging policies with charging being adjusted according to the Euro class and technology of the vehicle in favor of less polluting cars. Specifically, the current research aims to present a thorough structure of relationships correlating environmentally linked congestion and parking charging policies’ acceptability by Greek drivers with several parameters regarding drivers sociodemographic characteristics, travel profiles as well as environmental perspectives. A SEM model was developed using data from a questionnaire survey which provided a broad sample encompassing 733 respondent drivers from 3 main urban areas of Greece: Athens, Thessaloniki and Volos. The contribution of this research is the examination of a multitude of characteristics and attitudes and their correlation with public acceptability of the implementation of the two examined environmentally linked transport charging policies in Greek urban areas. Several statistical relationships were detected and quantified correlating the acceptability of the two examined policies with five latent unobserved variables: (i) demographic characteristics, (ii) travel characteristics, (iii) travel personal satisfaction, (iv) car choice and (v) environmental perspectives. Based on the above key findings and the overall research results, the following practical recommendations can be extracted, which are crucial both for stakeholders as well as for policy makers. The public acceptability of environmental congestion charging policy and the public acceptability of environmental parking charging policy were found to be positively correlated with each other, meaning that a driver who supports the one environmentally linked charging policy is more likely to support the other one as well. Additionally, environmental sensitivity is one of the most influential factors that positively affect the acceptability of the two examined transport charging policies. It must be noted that a travel profile presenting a more intensive commuting is positively correlated with higher acceptability levels, probably because it is believed that traffic congestion levels and parking management will be improved with the implementation of such policies by decreasing travel time, which includes the time searching for parking. Analysis has also shown that younger people, high-educated respondents and females are more likely to accept the environmental charging policies under consideration. It is clear that cities will be planning and implementing sustainable urban mobility strategies and policies in the future in order to transform their congested centers; however, this transition does not have a successful manual. Travel and traffic charging measures have been taken into account as key strategies for managing travel demand, traffic congestion and air pollution from road transportation. Each city should adopt policies that fit to the socio-economic characteristics of the country and more specifically of the city. Both public and political acceptability are considered essential to guarantee the success of transport charging policies. If not, the respective policies will not be accepted by users and will lead to opposite results for policy makers. Based on the above, a key contribution of the present analysis refers to stakeholders and especially policy makers that aim at successful and acceptable sustainable policies by understanding the factors that affect public acceptability of environmentally linked trans-
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9208 13 of 15
portation charging policies, especially in Greek urban areas. More specifically, based on the present analysis, special focus should be given on dissemination actions and incentives targeted to specific user profiles that are not positive on accepting these charging policies. These profiles are based both on demographic characteristics as stated above but also on travel and environmental ones. It must be noted that the present research is not without limitations. The questionnaire yields self-reported data on characteristics and attitudes on various travel and environmental aspects. Self-reported data from questionnaire replies have known deficiencies in terms of accuracy and lack of direct observation capabilities [53] and response bias [54]. Nonetheless, in the context of this study, the two main questions about environmentally linked transport charging policies acceptability provide a clear acceptability criterion and the answers are drawn from a recent time period. Furthermore, the inclusion of additional Greek cities with different characteristics in the same statistical model could be considered one more limitation of this research. In this study, the cities under consideration were grouped together without investigating any differences and variations between them through the aggregate level SEM of the present study. 