Food is the core of urban daily life and socio-economic activities but is rarely the focus of urban planning. The spatial layout of food retail outlets is important for optimizing the urban food system, improving land resource allocation, and encouraging healthy food consumption. Based on food retail POI data, this study employed kernel density estimation, road network centrality, spatial autocorrelation analysis, and locational entropy to analyze the spatial characteristics of supermarkets, produce markets, and small stores in an urban center in Beijing, and explored street coupling and supply-demand matching. The results indicated that within the study area: (1) supermarkets had an obvious “core-periphery” distribution, produce markets had a polycentric distribution, and small stores had a relatively uniform distribution; (2) road network centrality indices revealed a differentiated multi-core-edge distribution; (3) streets with high locational entropy values for supermarkets and produce markets were mostly concentrated in the central area, whereas the matching distribution of small stores was relatively balanced. From the perspective of urban planning, policy implications are proposed based on spatial and social equity, urban-rural differences, population structure and distribution status, and a resilient supply chain. The study findings have practical significance for guiding the development of urban food systems in a healthy, just, and sustainable direction, as well as rational urban land planning. 1. conclusions The spatial layout of food retail outlets profoundly affects the food access environment for residents and reflects the rationality of urban land planning. Using network point-ofinterest data and spatial analysis models, this study explored the distribution patterns for three types of food retail outlets within the Fifth Ring Road in Beijing as well as street-centric coupling and supply-demand matching, and made five targeted policy recommendations. The main findings of the study are as follows: (1) Spatial patterns differed among the three types of food retail outlets. Supermarkets showed an obvious “core-periphery” distribution. Produce markets displayed multicenter distribution characteristics, and small stores were relatively uniformly distributed. (2) In terms of road network centrality and food retail outlet coupling, the distribution of supermarkets was coordinated with road network centrality, although some stores had poor location conditions, whereas small stores were significantly negatively correlated with road network centrality. (3) In terms of spatial agglomeration characteristics, supermarkets had the largest range of high–high type agglomeration areas, almost all of which were distributed inside the Fourth Ring Road. The local clustering characteristics of produce markets and supermarkets showed a certain spatial similarity, while the number of high– high agglomeration areas for small stores was small and they were located close to the Fourth Ring Road. (4) The distribution of streets with extremely high LE values for supermarkets was relatively concentrated in the central area, streets with extremely high LE values for produce markets were located inside the Fourth Ring Road, and the distribution of streets with matching LE values for small stores was relatively balanced. The findings of this study will be helpful for understanding the spatial pattern of food retail outlets in Beijing and provide a reference for scientific planning of urban public service facilities and the rational layout of food retail outlets. The development of urban food systems is not only a matter of food itself, but also involves a wide range of urban planning issues, including natural resources, transportation systems, economic development, social equity, etc. Solutions on how to redesign food systems to ensure sustainability and resilience have emerged based on the multiple innovative responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. We can now increase our resilience to future crises and mitigate them. For example, many food suppliers and retailers are shifting to online businesses (Open Food Network), and social enterprises are providing fresh, local food and backyard gardening kits to vulnerable populations. 