Decentralized finance (DeFi) is known for its unique mechanism design, which applies smart contracts to facilitate peer-to-peer transactions. The decentralized bank is a typical DeFi application. Ideally, a decentralized bank should be decentralized in the transaction. However, many recent studies have found that decentralized banks have not achieved a significant degree of decentralization. This research conducts a comparative study among mainstream decentralized banks. We apply core-periphery network features analysis using the transaction data from four decentralized banks, Liquity, Aave, MakerDao, and Compound. We extract six features and compare the banks’ levels of decentralization cross-sectionally. According to the analysis results, we find that: 1) MakerDao and Compound are more decentralized in the transactions than Aave and Liquity. 2) Although decentralized banking transactions are supposed to be decentralized, the data show that four banks have primary external transaction core addresses such as Huobi, Coinbase, and Binance, etc. We also discuss four design features that might affect network decentralization. Our research contributes to the literature at the interface of decentralized finance, financial technology (Fintech), and social network analysis and inspires future protocol designs to live up to ⋆ The corresponding author Luyao Zhang is supported by the National Science Foundation China on the project entitled “Trust Mechanism Design on Blockchain: An Interdisciplinary Approach of Game Theory, Reinforcement Learning, and HumanAI Interactions.” (Grant No. 12201266). Yutong Sun is supported by the Summer Research Scholar (SRS) program 2022 under Prof. Luyao Zhang’s project entitled ”Trust Mechanism Design: Blockchain for Social Good” at Duke Kunshan University. Yufan Zhang and Zichao Chen are supported by the Social Science Divisional Chair’s Discretionary Fund for undergraduate research as the Teaching and Research Assistants of Prof. Luyao Zhang at Duke Kunshan University. Yufan Zhang, Zichao Chen, Yutong Sun, and Luyao Zhang are also with SciEcon CIC, a not-for-profit organization aiming at cultivating interdisciplinary research of both profound insights and practical impacts in the United Kingdom. Yulin Liu is also with Shiku Foundation and Bochsler Finance, Switzerland. We thank the anonymous referees at Computing Conference for their professional and thoughtful comments. ar X iv :2 21 2. 05 63 2v 5 [ ec on .G N ] 8 J ul 2 02 3 2 Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Zhang the promise of decentralized finance for a truly peer-to-peer transaction network. 1 conclusion is identical to the modularity finding, and it matches the results of other network dynamic properties as well. This circumstance suggests that the Liquity platform is currently more centralized than other platforms. 3.2 core-periphery structure comparison between contract addresses and externally owned addresses In addition to the network feature analysis, we conducted further exploration of the detected core-periphery structure for the transaction networks of each token. As introduced in Section 2, we conducted the core-periphery structure analysis on the daily transaction networks for the DeFi tokens, LUSD, LQTY, AAVE, Dai, and COMP. Using the Python Web3 package [34], we subsequently queried the real types of addresses detected as core nodes. To further investigate the decentralization of a DeFi token, we further contrasted the core-periphery structure study results in terms of the address types. On the Ethereum blockchain, there are two types of addresses: contract addresses (CA) and externally owned addresses (EOA). The former represents the executable smart contract on the blockchain, whereas the latter consists of user accounts. We extracted the unique addresses that were detected as core nodes for at least one day within the time span of the data source. Figure 8 demonstrates the distribution of the days for them being core nodes in terms of the address type. Moreover, we investigated the detailed address information via Etherscan.io [23] of the outlier addresses of the distribution, which are also annotated in Figure 8. We observe that the CA outliers with the most core days are the token contracts created by the DeFi protocol developer. For instance, the CA with the highest number of core days in the AAVE transaction network is the Aave:
Staked Aave (642 days), which is the token contract of the AAVE token. Other outliers of CA are the decentralized cryptocurrency exchanges built on Ethereum using smart contracts. For instance,Uniswap [39] is one of the automated liquidity protocols powered by smart constants that exist as outliers in all five token transaction networks, which enables peer-to-peer market making. Another decentralized cryptocurrency exchange that exists as the CA outlier for all five tokens is AirSwap [2], which can also archive peer-to-peer trading of Ethereum tokens. The outliers among EOAs are mostly centralized cryptocurrency exchanges. The most obvious examples are Coinbase [18] and Binance [10], both of which are famous exchanges where users can trade cryptocurrencies. Given the vast variety of trading tools and supporting services for users to earn interest [10], centralized cryptocurrency exchanges with a high volume of transactions have gained immense appeal, where a large number of transactions occur on these EOAs. However, the centralized exchanges bring high centralization” to the decentralized bank transaction networks. Table 4 summarizes the first list date for the four DeFi protocols. 4 conclusion and future research According to Cong et al. (2022) [20], the degree of decentralization and the stability of the trading network are both important factors in building trust for decentralized banks and increasing the inclusiveness of the decentralized bank platform. We, therefore, conducted a comparative study of four major decentralized banks including Liquity, Aave, MakerDao, and Compound, evaluating transaction decentralization using social network analysis. We made two major findings: first, the largest externally owned address cores for LQTY, LUSD, AAVE, Dai, and COMP mainly include exchanges such as Huobi, Coin base, and Binance, second, MakerDao and Compound are more decentralized in trading than AAVE and Liquity. Second, as LQTY has not yet been listed on some exchanges, such as Binance, the
token may be less well known. How would the internal design features of governance, airdrop, loan before deposits, and stablecoins and the external events such as blockchain mechanisms upgrade [47, 32] affect network decentralization and other desired properties [48]?