Psychosocial factors contribute to persistence of poverty, but are rarely addressed in poverty reduction programs. We use mixed methods to investigate the relationship between a psychosocial behaviour change approach—empowered worldview (EWV), and investment decisions in children wellbeing among smallholder farmers in Zambia. Three years after exposure to EWV, logistic regression model results suggest that exposure to EWV was associated with an increased probability of parents providing basic needs of children including school fees, clothes, and food. This probability increased with more trainings. Using a matched sample, the average treatment effect on the treated of EWV is positive and statistically significant. Qualitative results reveal EWV enhanced participant agency, spouses’ propensity to work together and with others in the community, and aspirations for themselves and their children. These results point to the prevalence of psychosocial constraints and the need for interventions to sustainably address them to support human development. * Vidya Diwakar vdiwakar90@gmail.com Amanda Lenhardt a.lenhardt@odi.org.uk Emmanuel Tumusiime etumusii@worldvision.org Joseph Simbaya josephsimbaya@yahoo.com Arthur Moonga moongaarthur@gmail.com 1 Institute of Development Studies, Falmer, UK 2 ODI, London, UK 3 World Vision, Federal Way, WA, USA 4 Institute of Economic and Social Research, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 5 Frontiers Development and Research Group, Lusaka, Zambia 1 conclusion and implications for programming and policy Our results indicate a positive and significant relationship between a higher number of EWV trainings and the ability of households to provide clothes, education, and food for children. Propensity score matching further confirms the positive relationship between EWV exposure and these higher-level wellbeing outcomes. Keeping in mind the caveats outlined in Section 4, the quantitative models and qualitative insights point to a positive relationship between EWV training and child wellbeing outcomes. The evidence suggests potential pathways between behavioural changes and localised networks together contributing to improvements in wellbeing. The social and behavioural change aspects within the EWV curricula enhanced participant
416
1 3
agency, encouraged households to work together with others primarily in terms of economic engagement, and strengthened their ability to plan livelihoods and contingencies. At the household level, social resilience involved improved collaboration in child and spousal relationships. Beyond the household level, these relational attributes extended to a stronger propensity to engage in savings groups and groupbased farming. In these efforts, the identity and vision components of EWV helped individuals exert agency in deciding together how to strengthen livelihoods to help improve human development outcomes of children. Moreover, the cognitive social resilience components (e.g. confidence, agency, decision-making, and propensity to collaborate) strengthened through opportunities for collaborative activities meant that when emergencies did strike, households were able to more easily draw on pre-established networks to help smooth consumption and needs of children. To this end, multi-sectoral programming that recognizes and responds to the multi-hazard risk profile in study locations is an important step in contributing to sustained improvements in child wellbeing. In this effort, combining the EWV programme with additional complementary interventions in THRIVE is necessary. Alongside this focus on individual, household, and community-level drivers of wellbeing and the social resilience capacities permeating across these levels, policy and programming would also benefit from stronger links to and within existing institutions and wider systems, while recognising the behavioural aspects that are important in strengthening agency and collaboration. For example, ensuring that there are financial ladders enabling households to move up the finance chain, from savings groups through to cooperatives to bank savings and loans, “with linkages in between, would help the unbanked obtain access to more tools for smoothing consumption and making investments” (Shepherd et al., 2019). Developing system-level resilience through pro-poor infrastructure and policies that address underlying inequalities can help create an enabling environment for programmes to help promote child wellbeing over the long term. Ensuring that these programs are adequately
V. Diwakar et al. 1 3
complemented by efforts that support the agency, power, and participation of its participants will help offer a more integrated, sustainable approach to promoting human development. Annex: Wellbeing Categories
Wellbeing trajectories were developed through a participatory wealth ranking exercise from gender-disaggregated FGDs. This began with discussing the ‘universal/ conceptual based well-being scheme’ (see Table 9) with FGD participants and then understanding their perceptions and further community-specific characteristics of each category.