In the post-pandemic era, companies are facing challenges in their business development and may pay fewer attention to their sustainable development performance, whereas the investors are looking for better corporate sustainable development. Using a sample of Chinese listed companies during 2010–2018, this paper empirically examines the relation between corporate sustainable development performance, investor sentiment, and managerial overconfidence with econometric tools such as panel data regression and S-GMM estimation. Three kinds of corporate sustainable development activities as measured by Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) indexes, including consumer rights, employee benefits, and environmental protection, are proved to have a positive impact on investor sentiment. Compared to the SME and GEM Board, investor sentiment in the Main Board is less affected by corporate sustainable development. Furthermore, investor’s high sentiment leads to high managerial confidence in the SME and GEM Board, and managerial overconfidence is self-correcting over time. This paper illustrates why maintaining good corporate sustainable development performance is beneficial for listed companies from a new perspective. 1. conclusions, limitations, and future research The present research’s findings contribute to the literature on CSR and behavioral finance, providing a more holistic vision of broad issues in corporate sustainable development. On the one hand, better performance in three dimensions of corporate sustainable development, i.e., consumer rights, environmental protection, and employee benefits, reflected by well-developed CSR indexes, would positively impact the investor sentiment. This finding directly identifies how good CSR activities would possibly induce higher expectations from the market investors. In addition, this induced effect on investor sentiment would be transmitted to managers’ higher expectation on the companies, reflected by managerial overconfidence. This transmission describes one channel on how the internally rational corporate decision, reflected by CSR activities, would transfer to seemingly irrational manager sentiment, reflected by managerial overconfidence. On the other hand, the findings indicate that the force of CSR activities driving the transmission is heterogenous. For listed companies in the relatively immature market, the force is strong, reflected in the more significant results we figured out. This study’s contribution is a comprehensive version of CSR, investor sentiment, and managerial overconfidence where the competitiveness in the capital market generated by companies’ sustainability strategies would transfer to the companies’ internal driver and confidence for potential development. The empirically validated hypotheses discussed in the previous sections show that the theoretically sound findings can be achieved in real world contexts with detailed firm-level data and numerical CSR indexes. As evidenced in the existing literature, in addition to the promoting effect on companies’ profitability or innovations, managerial overconfidence may induce potential problems to companies. However, as we empirically showed in Section 5, managers for listed companies in both the Main Board and SME and GEM Board will timely adjust their overconfidence. It can be rationally expected that the overconfidence would not be unrestrictedly accumulated, and the dark side of overconfidence may be minimized by the managers. Sustainability 2022, 14, 10606 15 of 19
In addition, the estimation results also display strong heterogeneity of firm size. This study has shown that investors in the SME and GEM Board markets are more sensitive to CSR performance than those in the Main Board market. Accordingly, these investors may easily lead to managerial overconfidence in the listed companies of the corresponding stock market, and the transmission process as described above may be more efficient for SMEs. Therefore, this study contributes to the research on SMEs’ incentive of promoting CSR activities. The above findings have various academic and management implications. First, the results help to theoretically understand the important relationship between CSR, investor sentiment, and managerial overconfidence for companies. The importance of applying CSR strategies to gain the enthusiasm from the investors and further achieve the internal force from managerial overconfidence was confirmed. The timely self-correction to overconfidence was also confirmed. These findings contribute to expanding the existing literature in both CSR and behavioral finance. Thus, this study provides a preliminary yet promising framework for researchers who want to explore the roles of other important variables of management or corporate sustainability studies in the relationships discussed in the current work. Second, the findings have useful managerial implications. Given heterogenous sizes of the companies, it can be a feasible strategy for companies to inspire investor confidence through corporate sustainable development activities, such as improving product quality and after-sales service, investing more in employee welfare and putting more effort into diversity management, and raising the awareness of environmental protection. This may in turn become the source of managers’ enthusiasm, accelerating the development of the companies. On the other hand, it is also important to curb managerial overconfidence in the circumstance of overheat investment, especially for managers of growing companies. This may help avoid some irrational risk decisions. Our current research is among the first try to explore the relationship between corporate sustainable development performance, investor sentiment, and managerial overconfidence within the same framework. The limitation of this first try should be highlighted, and then the further investigation can be conducted to confirm or extend the findings. First, our sample is for one single country. Even though the selected country is widely considered as a representative for management or finance research within the Eastern Asian emerging economies, an international level sample or sample from other emerging economies or developed economies would allow for possibly more fruitful results and validate or expand the current results. Second, we do not have information on the micro-level detailed decision process within the management team, which would reflect how the external investor irrationality would drive the internal managerial irrationality with the force of corporate sustainable development performance. Other interview-based quantitative research or qualitative research may be incorporated to provide more insights. Third, the diversities existing in stakeholders of each company and the diversities across companies in different industries would naturally affect the actual level of social responsibility assumed by the companies, which may not be fully and correctly measured by some standardized CSR indexes. In addition, those non-measured yet observable CSR performance may induce investor sentiment and managerial overconfidence consequentially. An industry or company-based case study may help to complement the understanding of the relationship between corporate sustainable development performance, investor sentiment, and managerial overconfidence explored in the current study. At the same time,
Sustainability 2022, 14, 10606 16 of 19
researchers may apply samples from other countries or even international level samples to validate or further explore our findings, which may help the corresponding countries or regions improve both corporate sustainable development and corporate governance.