The COVID-19 pandemic caused a major upheaval to the lives of people and placed a strain on societal mental health. The aim of this research is to estimate the impact of the pandemic on the mental condition of the Polish population measured through the consumption of relevant medication and medical leave of absence from the workplace. Methods: We analyzed national-level data on the consumption of pharmaceuticals used in clinical practice in Poland in the treatment of depression and anxiety alongside medical absence in the workplace using the Interrupted Time Series model to estimate the significance of the pandemic. Results: We found no significant change regarding the consumption of pharmaceuticals with the development of the pandemic. Conversely, medical leaves of absence for psychiatric reasons increased significantly with the onset of COVID-19. The influence was strongest in the diagnosis of anxiety or reaction to severe stress and weakest in recurrent depression. Conclusion: The pandemic had a significant influence on the ability to work for psychiatric patients in Poland but did not change pharmaceutical use. Physicians should consider the mental health of patients impacted by the anti-epidemic measures. Further study is needed to fully understand the long-term impact of the pandemic on mental health in Poland. 1. conclusions. Until large-scale primary studies explicitly evaluating the mental health of populations in the pandemic are published, the question of the scale of the unmet need in psychiatric and psychological state of the population remains open and a burden to policy makers, employers, families and patients. In the meantime, secondary data is a viable source of knowledge that can guide research and decision makers. Poland is the sixth largest country in the EU, with a population of almost 38 million people. The single payer public healthcare system is one of the lowest funded in the European Union, with 6.5% GDP spent on healthcare, compared to an EU average of 9.9% [13]. Psychiatry specifically is a specific of concern, since according to data from Eurostat, there are only nine psychiatrists for 100,000 inhabitants in Poland [14], a penultimate result in the EU, with only Bulgaria having less. At the same time, there were 27 psychiatrists in Germany, 18 in Estonia and 15 in Hungary. The relatively low availability of specialists in psychiatry indicates that, in the extraordinary circumstances of a global pandemic, Polish patients may face difficulties in obtaining access to treatment, thus worsening their wellbeing. In this paper, we aim to estimate the impact of COVID-19 on the mental health of the Polish population. 2. materials and methods An analysis of two types of data was conducted. First, we looked at the consumption of antidepressants and antianxiety medication in the population. Secondly, we analyzed the information on the frequency and duration of sick leave due to psychiatric diagnosis. For the consumption of medication, we analyzed data from IQVIA Pharmascope database on prescription only (Rx) purchases done by patients in community pharmacies. IQVIA Pharmascope is a national-level database containing information on all products purchased in community pharmacies across Poland. Available information for pharmaceuticals includes: pack details (active ingredient, pack size, dose, brand name, manufacturer, EPhMRA Anatomic Therapeutical Classification [15] (ATC) levels 1 through 4), pharmacy identifier, reimbursement status, date of purchase (by month), price of purchase and purchased volume. We analyzed monthly data from January 2018 until October 2021 for drugs from classes N06A4 SSRI Antidepressants, N06A5 SNRI Antidepressants, N06A9 All Other Antidepressants and one molecule from the N05C0 Tranquillizers class (buspirone). Pharmaceutical consumption data was analyzed in both value and volume, on SKU (Stock Keeping Unit) level as well as the size of therapeutic doses purchased measured through Daily Defined Dose (DDD) for each molecule specified by the World Health Organization [16]. We looked at aggregated trends as well as analysis within the medication subgroups. The database does not contain information on patient characteristics, diagnosis, or the specialty of the physician issuing the prescription, therefore the presented figures will include treatment for multiple disorders as well as potential off-label use of the medication. To limit the effect of potential use in other conditions, verification of molecules used in clinical practice of depression and anxiety management in Poland was conducted by a clinician. The impact of depression and anxiety on the workforce was analyzed on data on the frequency and duration of medical leave due to a diagnosis of psychiatric condition collected by the Social Insurance Institution of Poland (pol. Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych, ZUS). ZUS is a state organizational unit in Poland, whose responsibilities include establishing entitlements to social transfers, collections of social security premiums (retirement, disability, sickness and healthcare) and payment of the benefits, among others [17]. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 2135 3 of 11
All leaves of absence from the workplace, both short and long-term, must be reported to ZUS. Additionally, justification documentation for the absence for medical reasons must be issued by a physician with the authorization of ZUS and must include information on the diagnosis that is the direct cause of inability to work. For this research, we procured data on medical absence due to selected ICD10 diagnoses: F32—depressive episode; F33—recurrent depressive disorder; F41—other anxiety disorder; and F43—reaction to severe stress and adjustment disorders; spanning the period of January 2018 to April 2021. The scope of the data included the count of patients and average duration of sick leave. Both types of collected data included a period before the onset of the pandemic, and several months of its duration in Poland. To compliment and contextualize the two primary datasets, additional sources were used. Data on the population of patients dealing with depression and/or anxiety in Poland were sourced from the National Health Fund publications and from the results of a large epidemiological study on mental illness in Poland—the EZOP project [18]. Data on the development of the pandemic in Poland for incidence, COVID and non-COVID-related mortality, as well as restriction stringency was sourced from OurWorldInData [1], an open-source database updated daily. For this paper, daily data for the period 1 January 2020 until 1 December 2021 was analyzed. Interrupted Time Series analysis was used to validate impact of the onset of COVID pandemic on pharmaceutical consumption and number of issued sick leave notes. To estimate the significance of COVID-19 on the analyzed series, we used two synthetic variables—a dummy for the period of the duration of the pandemic (from March 2020 to October2021) and a linear trend in the same period to capture slope change. Statistical analyses were conducted in the open-source software R, version x64 4.1.2 [19], using the RStudio interface. Data visualizations were done in MS Excel version 2102 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA). 3. results The estimated prevalence of depression in adults in Poland was estimated at 3.17% in the Global Burden of Disease Study [20] for the general population, and at 3.85% in the results of the latest nation-wide epidemiological study EZOP II for adults [21]. This corresponds to a population estimate between 1.2–1.45 million. Simultaneously, the lifetime prevalence of anxiety attacks is estimated at 7% in the EZOP II study, equivalent to 1.3% annually. The authors estimate that there are around 2.2 million people who have suffered from anxiety in Poland. Data from the NFZ report that reimbursement for antidepressants and antianxiety medication has been granted to 1.38 million people in 2020 [22]. 3.1. drug consumption The overall Rx market in pharmacies was worth 4.4 billion EUR [23]. The antidepressant and antianxiety medications that are the focus of this study constitute approximately 2.6% of the total Rx market value. According to data from IQVIA Pharmascope, annually, patients in Poland purchased more than 20 million packs of antidepressants and antianxiety medication valued at more than 114 million EUR. The monthly consumption of pharmaceuticals in this category in 2021 amounted to 2.3 million packs for the cumulative value of 12 million EUR. The consumption of pharmaceuticals indicated for treating depression and anxiety has been increasing steadily in Poland over the last years. The monthly consumption of antidepressants and antianxiety medication between January 2018 and October 2021 increased from almost 40 million doses to almost 60 million. The increase follows a linear trend as presented in Figure 1. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 2135 4 of 11
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, x 4 of 12
A peak in purchases was recorded in March 2020 with the onset of pandemic in Poland, followed by slightly lower sales over the next 6 months and ultimately returned to
the previous dynamics. Figure 1. Consumption of all antidepressants and antianxiety medication in Poland in DDD, January 2018–October 2021. Development of specific categories is presented in Figure 2. The most popular prod-
ucts are Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRI), representing 64% of the entire volume, followed by antidepressants of other mechanisms with 21% of volume and Serotonin
and Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRI) with 14.5%. Buspirone molecule classi-
fied as tranquilizer covers 0.3% of volume. All categories of medication present similar development patterns in time, with SNRI growing at a slightly larger rate. Consistency in
growth path is confirmed by high Pearson correlation factors along with significance levels at p < 0.01, as presented in Table 1. A peak in purchases was recorded in March 2020 with the onset of pandemic in Poland, followed by slightly lower sales over the next 6 months and ultimately returned to the previous dynamics. Development of specific categories is presented in Figure 2. The most popular products are Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhib tors (SSRI), represent 64% of the entire volume, followed by antidepressants of other chanisms with 21% of v lume and Serotonin a d Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRI) with 14.5%. Buspirone molecule classified as tranquilizer covers 0.3% of volume. All categories of medication present similar development patterns in time, with SNRI growing at a slightly larger rate. This study has several limitations. As the pandemic was ongoing as this research was being published, it was impossible to assess the full impact of COVID-19 on mental health in Polish patients. Secondly, the data obtained enables analysis on a level of aggregation which may obstruct the detection of underlying granular trends. Thirdly, the low number of observations in the analyzed time series inflates the uncertainty in estimates by reducing the scope for more sophisticated numerical analysis. The monthly format of the data inhibits the use of more time-sensitive variables, such as governmental restrictions, whose impact on drug consumption or sick leave would need to be quantified using higher granularity observations. 5. conclusions Although the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on the frequency and duration of sick leaves due to depression or anxiety in Poland, the consumption of pharmaceuticals remained largely unaffected and has been increasing at a consistent rate since 2018. This study showed that the COVID-19 pandemic may have a significant impact on mental health.