The COVID-19 pandemic has raised a number of new realities, sets of data, and opportunities for data-driven approaches, decisions, and conclusions. One particular area for which developments and data have been made available in record time is related to vaccines and their impacts on health conditions and saving lives. In this article, we use public domain information to study the prevalence of vaccines in different countries and how they can save lives. We conclude that there are different clusters of countries, for some of which solid statistical models were built, and show that vaccination rates provide significant contributions to saving lives in such countries, with impacts that can be computed by simulations based upon these models. 1. conclusions. One particular area for which developments and data have been made available in record time is related to vaccines and their impacts on health conditions and saving lives. In this article, we use public domain information to study the prevalence of vaccines in different countries and how they can save lives. We conclude that there are different clusters of countries, for some of which solid statistical models were built, and show that vaccination rates provide significant contributions to saving lives in such countries, with impacts that can be computed by simulations based upon these models. 1. introduction Due to its high level of contagious and rapid geographical spread, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic on 11 March 2020, less than three months after the first cases were diagnosed [1,2]. By the end of November 2020, there were more than 62 million confirmed cases and 1.4 million deaths worldwide [3]. Until then, the pandemic’s impact was mainly correlated with several factors such as the average age of the population, sanitary conditions, health conditions, and public health response restrictions [2]. However, since December 2020, with the rollout of the first vaccination programs [4], the vaccination coverage of the population has become another essential factor in understanding the pandemic evolution, slowing down the progress of the disease, reducing the impact of the pandemic, and saving lives [5]. As recognized by [5] in January 2021, “Vaccines do not save lives; vaccination does”. Despite the efforts of researchers, manufacturers, and governments to produce the first vaccines in a record period of less than one year [4,5], having the vaccines would not suffice by itself. In fact, issues such as dosage, schedules, effectiveness, surveillance, public health response restrictions, and vaccine hesitancy need to be addressed to control the pandemic [5] and save lives effectively. Vaccine hesitancy, the reluctance and, more often, refusal to have oneself or one’s children vaccinated, is indeed, together with political and logistic issues, one of the main challenges that are influencing the progress of vaccination programs in several countries [6–8]. This hesitancy seems to be due to multiple reasons such as age, insurance, confidence in government information, attitude toward vaccines, perceived benefits, and side effects of the vaccine, among others [6,7]. Since vaccination effectiveness requires a large majority of the population to be vaccinated, it depends on each person’s willingness to be vaccinated [5–7]. Therefore, it is not enough to overcome vaccine production and distribution’s political and logistical problems.strengths and limitations One of the most significant strengths of this study is the use of one-year public domain data from a large number of GPEs. Since not all GPEs had the same easiness of access to vaccines and not all GPEs are at the same level of development, vaccination did not have the same impact over all of the GPEs considered. However, it was possible to see that in developed GPEs with good vaccination coverage, vaccination was, unequivocally, an effective weapon against COVID-19. Another strength of this study is that it uses publicly available data from OWID, which is continuously updated. That being the case, any researcher can reproduce this study and even extend or expand it as time goes by and more data becomes available. This study also shows how data science fields and methods, namely statistics, machine learning, and data visualization, combined together, can be used to better understand complex phenomena, pandemic behavior, and vaccination impacts. This study is not without limitations, some of which are summarized next. Since the main objective was to give a global perspective of the vaccination impact, we tried to analyze data from as many GPEs as possible and in as many dimensions as possible. However, one important dimension that was not analyzed yet, given data collection constraints (namely, lack of available data), concerns the stratified impacts and conclusions associated with each specific COVID-19 virus variant. Such stratified impacts, including specifically, the effectiveness of vaccines depending on the pandemic prevalence or deaths by variants (e.g., the Delta VOC), could bring an additional perspective on vaccination impact and effectiveness. Similarly, more detailed analysis can be considered regarding stratified data analysis and modeling according to the kinds of vaccines administered in different countries. Notwithstanding, to perform such additional studies, more detailed data needs to be collected and made available for many of the studied GPEs. More detailed data would ensure that a similar global worldwide analysis could be conducted, along the perspective adopted in this paper but relying on more detailed data that is not yet available at this stage. To overcome some of these data limitations, we also ended up removing some GPEs from our data analysis and modeling efforts, mostly smaller GPEs with high numbers of missing values. In fact, this lack of broader stratified quality data and the lack of certain types of detailed data, such as the vaccines administered by manufacturers, is something all GPEs should be committed to addressing in order to allow for more detailed data analysis to be conducted in future studies. Only by making more of this good and detailed quality data available will data science be able to study further and learn from what has happened, understand why it happened, and contribute to better decision-making and future improvements in handling the COVID-19 or other pandemics. Something that may also influence the outcome of this and future studies and that GPEs should try to establish for handling pandemics regards the adoption of standardized criteria to define what are COVID-19 or other virus-related deaths. For example, some GPEs consider any COVID-19 positive hospitalized patient who died, independently of the reason the patient was hospitalized as a “COVID-19” death. Others did not adopt the same criteria. Therefore, this raises additional issues about data comparison, model building, or an overall consistent data-driven approach to decision-making and understanding of the phenomena across the world or in different GPEs. 5. conclusions This paper aimed at identifying the effectiveness of the vaccination programs against the COVID-19 virus during their first year of implementation. Vaccination and, even more so, high vaccination rates have played a pivotal role in saving lives. On the one hand, it significantly reduced the need for infirmary as well as intensive care unit hospitalizations. On the other hand, deaths per cases went down substantially. Findings support these conclusions not only when we address data reporting reality before and after vaccination but also across clusters of GPEs. Vaccines 2022, 10, 409 16 of 19
One should note that cluster B, with the higher developed GPEs, was the only one showing a more robust model since it was the unique cluster with more comprehensive data and evolution regarding the rollout of the vaccination programs. Moreover, despite its more accurate reality check in terms of much more COVID-19 tests, leading to the identification of much more cases, aggravated by its higher exposure to the pandemic consequences due to its aging population, cluster B was the one where vaccination won big over the virus. This evidence envisages the urgent need to ensure clusters A and C follow suit of what has already been achieved in cluster B.