The main goal of this article is to assess the functioning of hotels during the crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The analysis was carried out on the basis of selected Key Performance Indicators (KPI) in hotels in Polish cities (Kraków; Poznań; Tri-City: Gdańsk, Gdynia, Sopot; Warsaw; Wrocław). The time range of the analysis covers the whole period of the COVID-19 pandemic in Poland (March 2020–February 2022) with data for 2019—before the outbreak of the pandemic. The analysis of the collected results of OCC, ADR, and RevPAR generally indicates instability of the basic economic indicators dependent not only on the demand limited by the pandemic restrictions but also on the type of tourism prevailing in individual cities. There is a difference between the hotel industry in cities, based mainly on foreign guests and business tourism, and the hotel industry in tourist/coastal regions, which are dominated by leisure tourism. During the greatest restrictions, hotels in Poland recorded huge drops in KPIs: a 95% drop in OCC and RevPAR. It was also found that the instability of demand during the pandemic and rapid changes in the values of the indicators prove the need for greater use of KPI benchmarks. 1. conclusions Prior to the announcement of the pandemic, the hospitality market was in a dynamic phase and hoteliers were experiencing a period of prosperity. Unfortunately, the trend was abruptly interrupted. The restrictions introduced had a negative impact primarily on international and domestic tourism and, consequently, on the entire hotel industry. Based on the analyses carried out, it was concluded that:
Sustainability 2022, 14, 12454 13 of 16
– 2020–2021 proved to be the most difficult period for the hospitality industry in its entire history. Indeed, the sector has proven to be one of the most vulnerable to the negative impact of the pandemic and its associated restrictions. – a clear discrepancy has emerged between the urban hotel industry, based primarily on foreign guests and business tourism, and the hotel industry in coastal tourist regions where domestic leisure tourists predominate. – the gradual increase in the OCC index in 2022 cannot be the basis for assessing the economic condition of hotels, because the losses incurred in the pandemic and measured by, for example, RevPAR will require a longer time perspective. It was also found that KPI indicators (resulting from demand volatility during pandemic) are not fully sufficient for assessing hotel productivity and management tools. This underscores the need to increasingly utilise competitor-based revenue KPI benchmarks [73] or balanced scorecard [74]. Attention is also drawn to the need for revenue management flexibility in order to convert the revenue indicator into profit. It is even proposed to develop a value stream mapping (VSM) model based on six key drivers: organisational culture, demand forecasting, dynamic distribution channels, competition breakdown, dynamic and customised pricing, and daily reviewing [75]. Studies conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic in hotels in Poland and elsewhere, e.g., in Hungary [38], indicate that financial KPIs such as ADR and RevPAR are still important in the assessment of hotel performance. However, it has been noted that it is worthwhile to extend the analyses with non-economic indicators, e.g., employee satisfaction and loyalty [38], if hotel managers wish to ensure high quality of services and achieve high levels of guest satisfaction and productivity at the same time [76,77]. 8. limitations and future work The research was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic and the presented indicators relate to the crisis period, which is atypical for hotel operations. Only a representative group of three-star and four-star hotels were covered by them, as the majority of hotels in lower categories do not run revenue management and, consequently, do not calculate the RevPAR index. The choice of hotels has been limited to the most important tourist cities in Poland. Only economic KPIs were analyzed. 