This study investigates theories from the strategic entrepreneurship literature related to strategic entrepreneurship mindset, strategic entrepreneurship leadership, and entrepreneurial value creation. A sample of 85 SMEs was taken from the SME sector in East Java, Indonesia, using a non-probability sampling method with a purposive sampling technique. The data collection process was a survey with questionnaires distributed directly to the SME owners. The data analysis was carried out using a structural equation measurement model (PLS-SEM) and included outer model analysis, inner model analysis, mediation testing, and hypothesis testing. This study contributes to the strategic entrepreneurship leadership variable, which is a mediating variable. The study confirms this theory for SMEs to provide broader scientific ideas related to strategic entrepreneurship theory. The small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that were looked at can create entrepreneurial value through benefits and added value for individuals, organizations, and the social environment. This can contribute to progress and sustainability, which will help the economy in Indonesia and give decision-makers more information. 1. conclusions and recommendations Through the results of this research, we highlight a recommendation that SME leaders need to focus on executing the chosen strategy by involving the energy of everyone in their respective domains or task positions within the company. The SME leadership study has given significant results in terms of constructs and variables [6,9,10] which influence entrepreneurial value creation. The SME leaders studied have developed entrepreneurial skills and can look for opportunities that follow the dominant logic (core) of their current
Sustainability 2022, 14, 10321 10 of 12
business activity or business. The SMEs studied can create entrepreneurial value through benefits and added value for individuals, organizations, and the social environment to contribute to the progress and sustainability of the SMEs studied to boost the economy in Indonesia and provide insight for decision making. This study also contributes to the literature related to testing the mediating variable, namely strategic entrepreneurship leadership, which does not fully mediate the influence of strategic entrepreneurship mindset on entrepreneurial value creation, but partially mediates. This is because the strategic entrepreneurship mindset of the SMEs we examined directly affects value creation. The application of a strategic entrepreneurship mindset, strategic entrepreneurship leadership, and SME value creation follows the theory of strategic entrepreneurship developed by previous experts Ireland et al. [7]; Hitt et al. [6]; Sriboonlue [11]; Agha Muhanad and Gafforova, [12]; Lombardi et al. [15] and others that we adopted in this study. This study confirms this theory for small and medium-sized enterprises to provide a broader range of scientific ideas related to entrepreneurship. The strategic entrepreneurship theory developed by Hitt et al. [6] is the foundation for this research. In the same way that the model suggested in this theory adapts to the circumstances of the SMEs that are the subject of this investigation, this study also provides meaning to the mediating variables included in the research model. Strategic entrepreneurship is a novel term in studying entrepreneurship (opportunity-seeking behavior) and strategic management (advantage-seeking behavior). Strategic management research is gradually elucidating the relationship between strategic management and entrepreneurship; developing entrepreneurial strategies; intrapreneurship; the strategic posture of entrepreneurship in the organization; entrepreneurial orientation; the integration of strategic management as a context for entrepreneurial action; and the integration of entrepreneurial theory with strategic direction and resource-based views.