The global COVID-19 crisis has strongly affected tourism. In an emerging economy like Colombia’s, however, the pandemic’s effects may differ from those experienced in more advanced countries. Building on prior studies, this investigation aims to determine the economic and organizational impact of COVID-19 on the tourism sector in the areas of lodging, travel agencies, clubs, and restaurants by identifying indicators relevant to the business tourism sector. We contrast data obtained empirically from a survey administered to a sample of 289 Colombian tourism SMEs. The model, developed with structural equations, enables identification of the factors with the greatest influence. The results indicate a high impact on sales and personnel expenses, leading to a decrease in management and innovation capability. In the gradual recovery process, internal measures taken by business owners to face the crisis have been more effective than measures taken by the government. Moreover, firms have prioritized financial strategies and innovation in marketing and services.  The above figure identifies the tourism subsector that experienced the largest decrease in sales during the first year of the pandemic. Figure 3 shows that the firms most affected were travel agencies, followed by the lodging sector (a finding that coincides with [26]), and firms that sell food and beverages. Some of these results concur with [38]. The firms least affected were, thus, those whose main market is public administration and other firms, as the main customers of travel agencies and the hospitality sector are families and individuals. Hotels also showed a significant drop in sales in 2020, consistent with [18], but contradicting [85]. Analysis of the pandemic’s effect on organizations’ strategic management confirmed the veracity of H2; a decrease in tourism SMEs’ economic capacity led to a decrease in payroll. At the same time, the companies used their productive capacity or operating leverage less, increasing the weight of fixed costs on operating results. All these conditions led to significant decreases in business infrastructure, in line with [69]. The statistical results obtained also reveal the importance of developing budgets and proposing goals and strategies. The results indicate that tourism SMEs that conducted such management experienced less negative impacts on their sales and hired personnel, as also found in [69]. ID showed clear decreases in investment, especially during suspension of economic tourism activity. These results agree with [91]. Creativity and resilience were fundamental to strategy, however, as travel resumed and borders opene , initiating progress toward recovery. These measurements conc r with [15,92]. Based on the factor analysi , the results for the business situation, as measured prior to the pandemic, and or ID proce ses, analyzed th ough H4, do not ppear to b ignificant. This findi g affirms that changes in busi ess situati n during the pandemic could have led to decreases in touris firms’ ID, as tated by [16]. This fi ding con rasts with changes experienced during ocial distancing by other busin sses grounded in digital resources for marketing and product and service innovat on, as [93] propos . Finally, we analyzed the elationship betw e ID nd strategic manag ment through H5. The results are compatibl with mo t current theories. For example, they alig with the contribution of [94], which supports the hypoth sis that nnovation practices in business management and adaptability to change contributed to firms’ ability t endure the effects of the crisis, as well s to economic and financial recovery, in line with [95]. 6. conclusions In pur ing our goal to determine the economic–organizational impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the tourism subsectors in Colombia, this study demonstrates that the main impact on tourism firms occurred in sales figures, with an average fall of 50% in 2020 compared to 2019. Similarly, suspension of trips and mandatory distancing led to inactivity in around 60% of tourism firms, generating a decrease in payroll of up to 10% in some cases. To this serious employment situation, we must add the closing of 25% of tourism firms, reported
by official statistics. These negative effects, reflected in the national economy, are still being felt. One measure adopted to contain the effects of the pandemic was increased remote work. This measure was useful during lockdown to reduce the impact on employment, but it was not sufficient to sustain tourism firms economically, as the reduction in revenue required them to decrease their operating costs and expenditure. Public support contributed partially to mitigating the negative effects on SMEs’ sustainability, but it was not enough. The loosening of social distancing measures and possibility of travel initiated the reactivation process in the tourism sector. However, most firms had to make significant investments to reach their customers through ICT and to fulfill the public-health requirements. Sales for 2021 show that recovery is still underway; the number of workers in the tourism sector has not returned to 100% of pre-COVID-19 employment. In firms’ internal management, the economic and financial situation gradually affected decisions about investment and management, requiring managers to prioritize essential expenses. The pandemic, thus, had serious implications for organizational strategic management and ID processes at the beginning of lockdown. This study showed that management strategies in areas related to finance and innovation facilitated tourism’s gradual recovery. Contrasting the hypotheses as a whole showed a weaker relationship between tourism SMEs’ business situation when facing the pandemic crisis and investment in ID. This finding shows decreases in investment during the most critical months but also suggests that firms opting for strategic use of technology and innovation in the market and services achieved greater advances in economic recovery. Innovation and technology, thus, support strategic management of both finance and customers. This effect occurred through formulation and monitoring of budgets for sales and costs, measures that promote achievement of financial goals and productive capacity. This activity also made it easier for tourism SMEs to reach existing and potential customers. The study findings recommend that tourism entrepreneurs continue to strengthen management towards recovery based on strategies that integrate the economic and financial area, customers, and sales with innovation and efficient marketing, while also providing attractive, efficient, and sustainable services. The findings also suggest projecting goals and formulating strategies from all perspectives on the tourism business, based on the strengths and needs for change that the pandemic revealed. Such strategies will achieve economic and employment recovery, while also contributing to environmental and social sustainability. Among our study’s limitations is the lack of information on firms that suspended activity or ceased economic activity definitively. Another limitation is recognizable bias in some responses, which may be due primarily to the fact that the respondents were financial managers and did not cover all areas of the firm. 