With the acceleration of urbanization, domestic waste has become one of the most inevitable factors threatening the environment and human health. Waste classification is of great significance and value for improving urban environmental quality and promoting human well-being. Based on the theory of planned behavior, we added external and socio-economic factors to systematically examine how they affect residents’ waste classification behavior (WCB). We collected 661 valid data through a questionnaire survey conducted in Jinan, a pilot city for waste classification in China. Key driving factors were identified by combining binary logistic regression and the principal component analysis. The results showed that the elderly, women, and people with higher education are more likely to participate in waste classification. Attitude, collaborative governance, and institutional pressure positively affect WCB, while subjective norm and infrastructure have a negative effect. Knowledge mastery and degree of publicity are positively and significantly related to WCB, but other perceived behavioral control subvariables negatively affect WCB. Based on the results and status of waste classification in Jinan, we propose the multi-agent linkage governance pattern from various dimensions to explore a powerful guiding incentive that can enhance WCB and provide a reference for waste management policymakers. conclusions. research hypothesis The TPB was first proposed by Ajzen (1991) to expand on the theory of reasoned action, which assumes that people carry out a specific behavior mediated by their intentions. The factors that affect individuals’ behavioral intention can be divided into three categories: attitude, subjective norm, and perceived behavioral control. The attitude toward behavior refers to residents’ positive or negative evaluation of a particular behavior’s contribution (Razali et al. 2020). A subjective norm relates to the fact that people perceive social pressure from relatives, friends, and other social groups who are important to them thereby performing the
expected behaviors. Perceived behavioral control reflects expected barriers in participants’ actual behavior. Previous studies have confirmed that TPB not only predicts individual WCB through the intention channel but also can take other influencing factors into account to improve explanatory power according to a specific research context (Fan et al. 2019; Govindan et al. 2022). Based on the actual situation and the implemented policies of waste classification in Jinan, we additionally selected four factors—basic personal information, collaborative governance, infrastructure, and institutional pressure—to initially construct the WCB conceptual hypothesis model (Fig. 1). Moreover, 24 secondary explanatory variables were included to analyze the influencing mechanism. basic personal information The waste classification process involves social and individual dimensions. Socioeconomic factors through residents’ basic personal information directly affect individual behavior. Increasingly, research has gradually confirmed that some socioeconomic drivers can significantly affect the tendency of WCB. Afroz et al. (2009) revealed that people who are well educated and have high incomes are more willing to pay for waste management. Adzawla et al. (2019) found that socioeconomic factors such as education, regional location, and per capita income are important in determining a household’s waste disposal system. In most households, solid waste management is run by women. More females than males are involved in pro-environmental activities such as waste recycling and classification (López-Bonilla et  al. 2020).  Based on the credit score and the length of time of volunteers, society sets up the level of domestic waste disposal fees and implements the ladder fee system to improve residents’ engagement through community management. Third, enhance the multi-layer supervision system to ensure the operation of the guidance and incentive mechanism. On the one hand, introduce the market regulation system to construct long-term operations contributing to the marketization and economic construction of waste classification. The market can achieve the purpose of recycling and reducing waste by adjusting the supply and demand of waste classification. Enterprises assist waste management and classification with the economic market to turn the waste disposal process into a complete industrial system. On the other hand, construct various information-sharing platforms to provide residents with channels for opinions and suggestions. These platforms can integrate information and timely feedback to government and communities to promote waste classification and management work and help form a new grassroots social governance pattern of co-construction, co-governance, and sharing. conclusions Waste classification is an important component of urban ecological civilization construction. Exploring the WCB and its driving forces is conducive to green and sustainable
development. We selected seven communities in Jinan City of China and collected 661 valid questionnaires to analyze the current issue and influence mechanism of WCB. Based on previous research and the current situation in Jinan, we further extended the TPB and took internal factors and the external environment into consideration. Incorporating seven influencing factors and their secondary variables into the theoretical framework, we combined PCA and binary logistic regression to analyze the questionnaire’s data. The main findings are summarized as follows. The elder, women, and people with higher education are easier to engage in waste classification, while the monthly income insignificantly affected residents’ WCB. Meanwhile, attitude, collaborative governance, and institutional pressure have a significantly positive effect on residents to classify household waste. However, subjective norm and infrastructure negatively affect this behavior. Two secondary variables—knowledge mastery and degree of publicity in perceived behavioral control factor—have a positive effect on WCB while other variables negatively influence WCB. Based on these results, we constructed the multi-agent linkage governance pattern to help transform residents’ intentions into classification behavior with the combination of multi-stakeholders and external incentives. This study identified the key factors affecting WCB and established an effective incentive mechanism, which provided a strong guarantee for implementing waste classification policies in Jinan. 