Environmental sustainability is one of three pillars of sustainability. However, a significant worldwide deterioration in the environment has been experienced since the Industrial Revolution, but the efforts to protect the environment date back to the 1970s. In this context, many economic and non-economic factors underlying environmental degradation have been investigated until today, but the influence of economic freedom indicators and education on the environment have been relatively less analyzed and the researchers have mainly focused on the influence of economic and institutional variables on the environment. Therefore, this paper investigates the reciprocal interplay among economic freedom indicators, education, and environment in EU member states over the 2000–2018 term by using a causality test with cross-sectional dependency and heterogeneity and taking the research gap into consideration. The causality analysis indicates that market-oriented economic structure and education can be beneficial in combatting environmental degradation. 1. conclusions Environmental degradation is one of the critical problems of the globalized world. The implications of a degraded environment such as climate change, air and water pollution, drought, and loss of biodiversity have been experienced in every part of the world and have become a serious threat to the environment and economic sustainability. Therefore, economic and non-economic determinants of environmental degradation have been intensely explored by researchers. However, the impact of economic freedom and education, which can affect all other significant determinants of environmental degradation, on the environment has not been explored sufficiently. Furthermore, the studies analyzing the interaction between economic freedom and the environment have generally conducted oneway panel analyses, in other words, studied the impact of economic freedom indicators on the environment, and disregarded the country-specific characteristics. Therefore, this study investigates the reciprocal interaction between economic freedom indicators, education, and CO2 emissions by means of the bootstrap Granger causality test with cross-sectional dependency and heterogeneity in a sample of the EU members that have been successful in improving environmental sustainability, to make a contribution to the related literature. Both panel and country-level causality analyses point out that economic freedom, government size, international trade freedom, and education are significant determinants of environmental degradation proxied by CO2 emissions, although country-level findings partially differ depending on country-specific characteristics in line with the theoretical expectations. Therefore, reforms toward market-oriented economic structures and education can be used effectively to combat environmental degradation by using market-based environmental instruments, raising environmental awareness, and developing green or energy-efficient technologies. Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.S., Y.B., M.D. and F.H.S. ; methodology, G.S., Y.B., M.D. and F.H.S. ; formal analysis, G.S., Y.B., M.D. and F.H.S. ; data curation, Y.B. and F.H.S. ; writing—original draft preparation, G.S., Y.B., M.D. and F.H.S. ; writing—review and editing, G.S., Y.B., M.D. and F.H.S. ; supervision, G.S. and Y.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: The data were obtained from the databases of the World Bank and Fraser Institute through the following links: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.ATM.CO2E. PC (accessed on 25 February 2022); https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.TER.ENRR (accessed on 25 February 2022); https://www.fraserinstitute.org/economic-freedom/dataset?geozone=world& page=dataset (accessed on 11 March 2022). Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 8061 12 of 14