The purpose of this article was to establish the interrelations and mutual influence of organizational culture transformation, national culture, and innovative business models’ formation under the COVID-19 pandemic. To achieve the study goal, a multi-stage comprehensive exploratory study based on primary information obtained by expert interviewing was implemented. The developed methodological approach was tested on the example of small and medium-sized enterprises in Russia and China. As a result of the conducted testing, the previously formulated hypotheses were fully proved. H1: the negative shock of the pandemic and the ensuing quarantine restrictions caused critical changes in the business environment, cancelling the relevance of previously effective business models. H2: the new business environment required enterprises to significantly transform their organizational culture. H3: under the conditions of shock changes in the business environment and forced transformation of organizational culture the main condition for the sustainable development of enterprises is innovative business models. Н4: implementation of innovative business models depends on both the business environment and the influence of national culture. In addition, the study results may be of interest to academic researchers, suggesting empirically determined stable relationships (hypotheses H1, H2, H3, H4) between the transformation of organizational culture, national culture, and innovative business models’ formation to ensure sustainable development of enterprises under the COVID-19 pandemic and opening new promising directions for further research. conclusions important for both academicians and practitioners. The section creates recommendations for business management and identifies what areas may be missing in the research. materials and methods Innovative solutions, introduced on the organizational level, helped enterprises to process, store and report financial information, as well as react to emergencies (Una et al., 2020). Burgos and Ivanov (2021) showed that the purchasing power and government interventions under the COVID-19 pandemic have been adapted to a new environment including changes in online sales channels, digital twins in supply chains, end-to-end transparency and transformation of the organizational culture. Richter et al. (2017) underlined that business based on digital technologies and a culture of innovation can be seen as a future-oriented one. Similar to the current research, Sneader and Singhal (2021) discussed the main trends that define socio-economic life and how this model affects the global economy, business and society. The researchers found that leisure travel recovers from the recession. Moreover, the research admits that there is an increasing monetization of ideas, an increase in entrepreneur activity, acceleration of Industry 4.0 through production automation and innovative management. From the societal point of view, enterprises invest much more in public health. Moreover, companies experience financial problems after the pandemic. Bettiol et al. (2021) concluded that quarantine restrictions have influenced business digitalization and encouraged all market stakeholders to use digital tools to promote hygiene and physical safety in everyday life. The researchers identified two main aspects that companies should focus on to cope with the crisis: (1) introduce a customer-centric strategy; (2) build all business processes based on the sharing economy. The research conducted by Bettiol et  al. (2021) came to the same conclusions on agile innovation management for the sharing economy and a value proposition to customers. The research analyzes the innovative activities and business imperatives arising from the COVID-19 pandemic and their impact. Despite the positive trends in China and Russia (Garcia-Herrero & Xu, 2019) and the adoption of the centralized management model, there are significant differences in the business innovation activity in supply and demand. At the same time, Hoang et al. (2021) found that e-commerce helps to increase sales and ensure stable market operations under social distancing and other quarantine restrictions. The scholars suggest that political leaders should encourage companies to introduce technology and foster an innovation culture to achieve flexibility. Shumakov (2021) underlined that enterprises with corporate culture align to the business strategy and overcome the challenges of the pandemic at a minimal cost. The research recommends transforming the management culture in the following ways: monitor the current state, introduce changes, and demonstrate new behavior patterns that support the innovative business models (Gribanov, 2019). conclusion The study developed a methodological approach to assess the implementation of innovative business models in the context of transforming organizational structures in the COVID-19 pandemic. Testing the proposed approach on the example
1 3
of SMEs in Russia and China allowed fully confirming the formulated hypotheses. The study was conducted using qualitative methods of analysis, which is due to the imperfection of the statistical information system, which limits the ability to analyze statistical data. The expert interviews fully confirmed hypothesis H1 that the negative shock of the pandemic and subsequent quarantine restrictions caused critical changes in the business environment and abolished the relevance of previously used business models. The study results also confirmed that the new business environment requires a significant transformation of enterprises’ organizational culture (hypothesis H2). At the same time, this issue suggests the possibility of further in-depth research, as part of the experts perceive this transformation as temporary, related exclusively to the impact of the pandemic, which requires additional clarification. The study results also proved hypothesis 3 (H3), according to which innovative business models become the main condition for the sustainable development of enterprises under the conditions of shock changes in the business environment and forced transformation of organizational culture. In addition, the bivariate distribution of the interview results revealed significant differences in the opinions of Russian and Chinese experts, which confirms hypothesis 4 (H4) about the relationship between the introduction of innovative business models, national business environment, and the influence of national culture. The study assessed the main barriers to implementing innovative business models by SMEs to achieve sustainable development during the COVID-19 pandemic. This assessment can be useful in the development of SME assistance programs by governmental and non-governmental agencies at national and regional levels. The proposed assessment approach is easily scalable and adaptable to the specific conditions of individual regions or industries due to the chosen research format and does not require additional expensive software. In addition, the use of benchmark questions with quantitative assessment when conducting interviews makes it possible to use this approach for monitoring, which will make it possible to assess the effectiveness of programs to promote SMEs. The study may also be of interest to academic researchers as it suggests empirically determined relationships (hypotheses H1, H2, H3, H4) between organizational culture transformation, national culture, and the formation of innovative business models to ensure sustainable development of enterprises under the COVID-19 pandemic. 