The study aimed to investigate (1) the influence of internal compensation gap on firm performance (FP) and (2) the mediation effect of executive compensation level on the relationship between internal compensation gap and FP of listed energy companies in China. The sample was sourced from all upstream companies in energy industry on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets. The data were collected from the companies’ annual reports from 2015 to 2020. Descriptive analysis, correlation matrix, and unbalanced panel data analysis were used to analyze the data. The results show that internal compensation gap has a positive influence on FP and compensation level has a mediating effect on such influence. This study provides insight into the determination of compensation for companies to incentivize executives to demonstrate their abilities for the organization’s advantage. Additionally, the findings demonstrate that tournament theory and agency theory can explain how compensation gap and level affect FP. KEyWoRdS Agency Theory, China, Compensation Level, Energy Industry, Executive Compensation, Firm Performance, Internal Compensation Gap, Tournament Theory keywords  agency theory, china, compensation level, energy industry, executive compensation, firm performance, internal compensation gap, tournament theory  conclusion, including contributions and implications and limitations of the study, and suggestions for future research. literature review and hypothesis development  theoretical perspective  tournament theory Lazear and Rosen’s (1981) tournament theory states that employees can be rewarded based on their rank in the organization, illustrating why organizations offer substantial compensation to top management to reward those who work hard to get one of the highest positions. A person’s promotion is determined not only by their productivity, but also by the basis of their position in the organization in comparison to others. Incentives for promotion of those in lower positions depend on the salary that will be increased after promotion. Employees are promoted not merely because they execute their jobs well, but because they do them better than others (Connelly et al., 2013). Therefore, if a common belief is that humans are rational and respond only to incentives, actually the wider the difference in rewards for each promotion, the greater the incentive for employees to make an effort. Increasing the compensation disparity between senior managers can successfully foster rivalry among managers, enhance their initiative to work more (Kini & Ryan, 2012) to increase their salary and advance their careers, and, as a consequence, increase the company’s performance (Heyman, 2005; Gong & Liu, 2015). However, the organization’s competitive environment has limited the salary rank in the. While tournaments can encourage more effort, they can also encourage counterproductive conduct (Henderson & Fredrickson, 2001). Salary disparities will push employees to work more, but they will also make the workplace unappealing. The high competition may destroy the motivation to work as
a team and negatively affect the organization (Bloom & Michel, 2002; Siegel & Hambrick, 2005). Therefore, the compensation structure must be balanced between the incentives provided for the effort and the mitigation of potential negative impacts on the organization. This indicates that the coefficient of the total effect (C) in Panel C is equal to direct effect (C’) plus indirect effect (a*b). Overall, the results showed that the influences
of compensation gap and compensation level on FP are consistent with the prediction. Therefore, hypothesis two is supported. conclusion The main purpose of this study was to provide empirical evidence on the impact of internal compensation gap on FP, as well as the mediation effect of executive compensation level on the relationship between internal compensation gap and FP of listed energy companies in China. The
results support both hypotheses, suggesting the positive influence of the internal compensation gap on FP together with the mediating role of compensation level in the relationship between compensation gap and FP. The findings of this study highlight how internal compensation gap incentivize executives through high pay level to deliver excellent performance. The finding demonstrating the positive influence of the internal compensation gap on FP is in line with prior studies (Canarella & Gasparyan, 2008; Cao et al., 2017; Harbring & Irlenbusch, 2004; Hu & Huang, 2012; Zhang & Liu, 2015). This implies that increasing compensation disparities among executives is a good motivator that impacts the company’s performance. Additionally, the findings of a mediation analysis suggest that both the internal compensation gap and the compensation level should be investigated simultaneously to illustrate the internal and external justice of executives (Oldham et al., 1986). Executives tend to compare their compensation not only to those on their own team, but also to those from other companies. In terms of the mediating effect of compensation level, it may be explained that, in an intriguing and growing industry such as the energy industry in China, a large compensation gap is beneficial, but a high enough compensation is also required. The internal compensation gap as a motivator for corporate growth necessitates a consideration of the internal challenges of executives to exhibit their potential, which leads to higher positions and pay. These challenges are also influenced by higher pay levels than other companies, which makes the executives feel valued and fair gaming in comparison to their peers in the industry. This explanation corresponds to Trevor and Wazeter’s (2006) study. They stated that employees respond to the internal pay gaps depending on their pay level. If the high-paid employees, which include the executives, find their compensation compared to their peers in the industry is high, they feel that their compensation is fair and respond positively to the gap. The findings of this study provide contributions to both practical and theoretical perspectives. Practically, this study serves as a guideline for companies in determining compensation mechanisms in order to incentivize executives to demonstrate their abilities to work for the organization’s financial performance. The findings of the study show that incentive compensation must include high internal compensation gap and high compensation level. Listed companies in China are mandated to disclose information about the compensation of executives. This allows executives to know about the compensation of other executives, both within and outside their company. Therefore, the company must define internal compensation gap, in order to create competition and promotion opportunities among executives. The excessive internal compensation gap, on the other hand, might lead to emotional dissatisfaction and dissension in management (Bloom & Michel, 2002; Firth et al., 2015). Consequently, the company must provide the satisfaction and assurance of justice that executives demand in exchange for their dedication, by paying them more than their industry rivals. In other words, it is indicated that companies need to consider compensation that not only has a substantial internal gap, but also a sufficient pay level. This will make executives feel as though they must compete with the team. However, in order to prevent strong rivalry that could result in bad outcomes, the company must pay competitively high compensation until the management is satisfied and committed to working for the organization. Theoretically, this study demonstrates that tournament theory and agency theory can be used to explain the impact of compensation on FP in the energy industry in China. The findings of this study support the notion of tournament theory, which states that companies can incentivize the executives to make their efforts by widening the compensation gap among them. This is consistent with Wang’s (2013) study, which allowed to find out that tournament theory is applicable to businesses in their growing and maturing stages of development or maturity. Concerning agency theory, the findings on the positive relationship between compensation level and FP back up the assumption that rewarding executives with high compensation could lead to performance improvement. In addition, the findings demonstrate that using these two theories provides insight into the impact of internal and external compensation disparities on FP. The findings bridge the gap in understanding how internal compensation gap works through the mediation of compensation level to increase FP. This indicates
that, when compared to employing just one of the theories on its own, utilizing both of them produces a more understanding of the impact that the executive compensation mechanism has on the success of the company. It is obvious that the compensation level increases the importance of compensation dispersion between executives. The corporation should establish a competitive atmosphere through the internal compensation gap to drive executives to achieve good performance. This motivator works effectively when the executives are satisfied with their compensation compared to their peers.