Measures of economic mobility represent aggregated values for how wealth ranks of individuals change over time. Therefore, in certain circumstances mobility measures may not describe the feasibility of the typical individual to change their wealth ranking. To address this issue, we introduce mixing, a concept from statistical physics, as a relevant phenomenon for quantifying the ability of individuals to move across the whole wealth distribution. We display the relationship between mixing and mobility by studying the relaxation time, a statistical measure for the degree of mixing, in reallocating geometric Brownian motion (RGBM). RGBM is an established model of wealth in a growing and reallocating economy that distinguishes between a mixing and a non-mixing wealth dynamics regime. We show that measures of mixing are inherently connected to the concept of economic mobility: while certain individuals can move across the distribution when wealth is a non-mixing observable, only in the mixing case every individual is able to move across the whole wealth distribution. Then, there is also a direct equivalence between measures of mixing and the magnitude of the standard measures of economic mobility. On the other hand, the opposite is not true. Wealth dynamics, are however, best modeled as non-mixing. Hence, measuring mobility using standard measures in a non-mixing system may lead to misleading conclusions about the extent of mobility across the whole distribution. 1 conclusions about the extent of mobility across the whole distribution. In fact, for any positive fluctuation amplitude σ, there will be randomness in the system. This randomness may drive changes in the observed wealth rankings, and as a result the standard measures may display a certain degree of mobility. 3.3 relaxation time and standard measures of mobility in rgbm In RGBM, the standard measures of mobility depend on both τ and the fluctuation amplitude σ, unlike the relaxation time. This is a consequence of the randomness playing a significant role in the wealth dynamics when we consider timescales that are shorter than the time required for the system to relax. In what follows, we describe the relationship between relaxation time and the standard measures of mobility in RGBM. Spearman’s rank correlation: Spearman’s rank correlation is inversely related to the relaxation time in RGBM. The rank correlation is also dependent on the fluctuation amplitude σ and the temporal difference δ between the two periods that are being compared. Larger values for both parameters lead to greater economic mobility. This can be seen in Fig. 1A, where we plot the log of the rank correlation divided by δ as a function of τ for various noise amplitudes. Intragenerational earnings elasticity: Similarly to the properties of the rank correlation, and as depicted in Fig. 1B, the IGE depends on both the fluctuation amplitude and the reallocation rate. Transition matrices: As evidenced in Fig. 2A, the transition matrices in RGBM reproduce the asymmetric property of the real world transition matrices and are well-approximated by the Gumbel copula (Fig. 2B). In Fig. 2C we visualize the relationship between Gumbel parameter θ and the reallocation parameter τ for various fluctuation amplitudes. We find that there is an inverse relationship between θ and τ , and the Gumbel parameter slope is further determined by the magnitude of σ. As τ increases, the value of the θ decreases, though disproportionately. We hereby point out that the θ parameter and the rank correlation share a direct relationship which cannot be represented analytically. As a way to visualize this relationship in Fig. 2D we plot the rank correlation as a function of τ . 3.4 mobility measures in non-mixing regimes So far we discussed the relationship between mobility measures and mixing in the stationary regime of RGBM. Studying this relationship in the non-stationary regime, when τ < 0 is impossible as then the system is not mixing (Stojkoski and Karbevski, 2022). Nonetheless, Spearman’s rank correlation, the earnings elasticity and the transition will indicate that there is still some mobility. We visualize this phenomenon numerically in Fig. 3. The results for Spearman’s correlation and the IGE suggest that in the negative τ regime, the magnitude of the reallocation rate does not impact the extent of mobility. Instead, mobility is dependent on σ, with larger noise amplitudes implying more mobility. Hence, it can be argued that the existence of mobility in the negative regime is solely a result of the randomness present in the system, but not of the reallocation mechanism. More importantly, because of this, individuals are not able to move across each possible rank. The thorough study of mobility in RGBM in this regime is outside of the scope of this paper and left for future work. 4 discussion and conclusion In this paper, we introduced the physical concept of mixing as a relevant phenomenon for quantifying the mobility of an individual between every wealth rank within an economy. We showed that standard mobility measures do not account for this property, whereas measures of mixing do. This is because, as we showed with the relaxation time example, every mobility measure that quantifies the degree of mixing will not be monotonic. This particular characteristic allows measures to quan-
tify whether the system is in a mixing state or not. Whenever the system is not mixing, measures of mixing will suggest no mobility. When the system is mixing, then there is no discrimination between individuals on the basis of their history: it is possible for everyone to move between any ranks in the distribution, and this will happen with certainty in the long run. We used this result to argue that mixing can be seen as a mathematical manifestation of the “American Dream”. Mixing is predicated on the existence of a transformation of wealth which has a steady-state distribution. Studies of wealth inequality often make the hypothesis that the transformation is given by the rescaled wealth. This case was also discussed here. However, a growing body of evidence suggests that in reality rescaled wealth might also be a non-ergodic, and hence a non-mixing observable. For instance, Berman et al. (2020) found that, in the case of RGBM wealth dynamics, negative reallocation (τ < 0) prevails in the US economy. Then, measures such as the relaxation time are undefined and mobility across the whole distribution is non-existent. Nevertheless, another transformation of wealth might exist which is mixing, and measures in terms of it might suggest that there is mixing in the economy. Then mobility between every quantile exists, but can be defined in terms of an another concept. For example, mobility can be defined in terms of growth of wealth or in terms of reduction of the unpredictability of wealth dynamics. Different concepts also require different analytical approaches, as they illuminate the distinct extent to which mobility is socially desirable. In other words, depending on the definition of economic mobility, an increase in economic mobility will not always translate into increased economic welfare. Hence, discovering the relevant wealth transformation is extremely important for policymakers to produce adequate measures for optimizing the mobility within an economy. We refer to Jäntti and Jenkins (2015) for a lengthy discussion on the various concepts of economic mobility and their social implications. We conclude by noting that in this paper we discussed mixing in terms of wealth mobility, but the same concept can be used for studying income dynamics (Stojkoski et al., 2021b, 2022a).