conclusion The COVID-19 pandemic has caused economic pressure. The COVID-19 pandemic substantially impacted the financial markets, including the Government bond market. The fiscal and monetary policy influenced the direct effect because governments and central banks made substantial efforts to lower the pandemic shock’s negative impact. More government departments and social organizations will use ESG information to make decisions and investments. Indeed, our research findings regarding the government bond market during the COVID-19 pandemic inform corporate decisionmaking. Countries’ carbon neutrality and zero emissions targets have boosted the ESG demand and the need to raise funds via government bonds. Moreover, governments have increased their ESG attention. A green government-bond index could contribute to attracting foreign investment. Our research showed different tendencies of government bond yields in two regions: the United States, and Germany (as a proxy for the euro area); as a result, the impact of the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic government bond yields seemed to be different depending on the country and the assessment period. We have chosen separate periods to value the actual effects and
Frontiers in Environmental Science | www.frontiersin.org June 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 88126015
shocks of pandemic levels and waves, which helped us identify some tendencies. Firstly, the results revealed different effects of the COVID-19 pandemic depending on the period investigated. In the first months of the pandemic, the yields of German government bonds demonstrated a positive reaction (increase). In contrast, the yields of the United States government bonds demonstrated a negative reaction (decrease) to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. The response both to the country-level and the global situation was identified. The first wave in Germany was quite interesting as we noticed that long-term yields were not affected while the 3-year tenor sector increased. Long-term yields are usually impacted by inflation expectations which could lower the effect. Germany is like a benchmark yield curve for the euro area and the minor risky asset in this region. We think that 3 year maturity is not among those popular ones, so for this reason, it was affected contrarily. The most liquid and most minor risky assets are up to 2 years maturity. The COVID-19 pandemic situation during the first wave was not so bad in the United States compared with other regions. Because of that and, of course, of the currency issues, government bonds were very attractive for local investors and foreign investors. So, due to high demand, the yields decreased in all maturity buckets. The results are, to some extent, different for the second phase: Germany and the United States bonds demonstrated a decrease in yield, we did not notice any differences compared to the United States’s first stage. Tendencies of the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic were very different in separate regions. In the United States case, effects in Germany and the United States were influenced strongly by other factors such as central bank interventions and substantial political risk volatility. The analysis of impulse response functions revealed that yield response differs depending on the maturity of the bonds. The markets also respond differently to a country-level and global pandemic situation. Although the short-term initial yield responses vary in direction, strength, and duration, it could be stated that the long-term response of German government bond yields appeared to be of a more negative nature, while the reaction of the United States government bonds was more positive. Summarizing our research results, we would like to stress that in stressful situations, for a short period, yields of government securities usually decrease because investors need safe assets, but later, other factors begin to influence stronger, and the negative effect of any crisis or pandemic decreases. As such, our empirical findings based on contexts Germany and the United States had
practical implications to strengthen business investors’ capability to cope with fear of failure at stressful situations of turbulent global financial markets (Dong, 2022). Practitioners in asset management could use our research findings in the risk management and investment management area. For example, portfolio managers in commercial banks, investment companies, or central banking should pay attention to regional and term structure issues, risk management decisions, and diversification. In addition, the results of stressful situations suggest that financial players should pay significant attention to the investment horizon by investing in short-term debt securities. The limitations of this research are that we focus only on specific markets and specific tenors of government bonds. The other limitation is that the COVID-19 pandemic environment must be valued if the research is repeated in the future. 