This paper examines the relationship between different types of employment and subjective well-being with a focus on informal employment. The China Labor-force Dynamics Survey (CLDS) for three selected years (2012, 2014 and 2016) shows an upward trend in the subjective well-being of urban workers in the 2010s. However, although the gap in subjective well-being between formal and informal workers narrowed, informal workers’ subjective well-being was still lower than their formal counterparts. Factors affecting the subjective well-being of formal and informal workers and their different effects were revealed to explain this difference. The subjective well-being of informal workers is significantly related to their informal status of employment, economic conditions (such as income and working hours), human capital, social capital (such as perceived social justice and perceived community connectedness) and urban environment. The paper enhances the understanding of people’s subjective well-being by differentiating informal/formal segments of working populations. 1. conclusions Our study examined the relationship between the development of informal employment and the overall societal level of subjective well-being in China. Based on the three-year social survey data in China within the second decade of the 21st century, we found that the current subjective well-being in Chinese society keeps increasing. In addition, the results show that informal employment negatively affects an individual’s subjective well-being, although this effect can be mitigated by the accumulated human capital, social capital, improved urban environment and the social welfare system. This study adds knowledge to the research on the subjective well-being of workers by differentiating formal and informal working populations in the context of the informalization of urban labor markets. We reveal the heterogeneity among workers’ subjective well-being by differentiating the type of employment and find that the internal and external determinants have different impacts on formal and informal workers. Specifically, informal workers’ subjective well-being is related not only to their informal status of employment but also to their economic conditions (such as income and working hours), human capital, social capital (such as perceived social justice and community connectedness) and urban environment. This study has some policy implications. First, the government should focus on improvements in working conditions and the urban social environment since the importance of non-economic factors is increasing. It is necessary to create a high-quality and decent working environment and improve social justice and community connectedness. Second, there are determinants with different impacts on formal, informal employed and informal self-employed workers. Policies should be differentiated according to the types of workers affected. For instance, for formal workers and employed informal workers, the policies should focus on improving community security since it is a crucial element for their happiness. For workers who are doing easy-access self-employed jobs, the government should encourage them to receive further education or technical training, help them to improve their skills, and to achieve higher quality social development.