The development trend of deepening regional trade agreements (RTAs) is becoming more prominent, traditional RTAs based on border terms continue to shift to deep RTAs based on the high level of border terms and a series of post-border terms, but the relationship between deep RTAs and residents’ health has not drawn much attention. Based on Gallup World Poll data from 2009 to 2017 covering 786,040 respondents in 143 countries, this study empirically examined the impact of deep RTAs on the health of residents as well as its influence mechanisms by using the combination of fixed effects and stepwise regression. The results show that deep RTAs have a significantly positive impact on residents’ health, which means that an increase in the depth of RTAs can improve residents’ health. However, the impact of deep RTAs on residents’ health is heterogeneous, caused by the different terms of RTAs, the different income levels of different countries, and the different types of residents. Meanwhile, deep RTAs mainly improve the health of residents through employment effects and environmental effects. This study highlights the importance of deep RTAs for improving the health of residents and provides new ideas for governments to assist in the formulation of policies that can effectively improve their residents’ health. 1.  Based on this, this study divided the sample countries into high-income countries and low-income or middle-income countries, according to the World Bank’s country income classification standard. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 8 display the results of the heterogeneity regression of differentiating the income levels of different countries, and the results show that the depth of RTAs significantly improved the health of residents in low-income and middle-income countries but had no significant impact on the health of residents in high-income countries. This is mainly because, compared with highincome countries, the domestic employment mechanism of low-income and middle-income countries still needs to be improved, and environmental protection terms are relatively lacking. Therefore, signing deep RTAs can not only effectively increase the domestic labor force participation rate, but can also reduce domestic air pollution, thus promoting an improvement in residents’ health through employment effects and environmental effects. 4.5.3. Based on Different Types of Residents
The first heterogeneity analysis is based on the residents in different residential areas. The sample residents are divided into urban residents and rural residents according to their living areas. Among them, the urban residents include residents living in cities or suburbs, and the rural residents include residents living in rural areas or small towns. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 show the results of the heterogeneity regression of differentiating residents’ residential areas. The results show that the depth of RTAs can significantly improve the health of both urban and rural residents, but it has a more significant impact on the health of rural residents. This is mainly because, compared with urban areas, there are few jobs and opportunities in rural areas, and the employment status of rural residents is unsatisfactory. The signing of deep RTAs will promote the employment of rural residents, and then greatly improve the health of rural residents through the employment effect. In addition, although rural areas are less polluted than urban areas, the signing of deep RTAs will further improve the overall environmental level of rural areas, and then slightly improve the health status of rural residents through environmental effects. Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The second heterogeneity analysis is based on the residents with different education levels. The sample residents are divided into higher education residents, basic education residents, or vocational education residents, according to their level of education. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 9 show the results of the heterogeneity regression of differentiating residents’ education levels, and the results show that the impact of the depth of RTAs on the health level of residents with a basic education and a vocational education is significantly positive, and the impact on the health level of residents with a higher education is also positive, but not significant. This is mainly because, compared with higher education residents, the employment status of basic education residents and vocational education residents is more uncertain, and their living environments are mostly at the medium level or below; therefore, the employment effects and the environmental effects generated by deep RTAs can effectively improve their employment status and living environment, thereby improving their health. 5. conclusions Based on Gallup World Poll data from 2009 to 2017 covering 786,040 respondents in 143 countries, this study empirically examined the impact of deep regional trade agreements on residents’ health and its influence mechanisms. The results are as follows: First, deep RTAs have a significant positive impact on residents’ health, which means that an increase in the depth of RTAs can improve residents’ health. Second, the impact of deep RTAs on residents’ health is heterogeneous due to the different terms of RTAs, the different income levels of different countries, and the different types of residents. To be specific: the depth of the “WTO+” terms and the “WTO-X” terms significantly improve residents’ health, but the depth of the “WTO+” terms has a more significant impact; the depth of RTAs significantly improves the health of residents in low-income and middle-income countries, but has no significant impact on the health of residents in high-income countries; the depth of RTAs can significantly improve the health of both urban and rural residents, but it has a more significant impact on the health of rural residents; the impact of the depth of RTAs on the health level of residents with a basic education or a vocational education is significantly positive, and the impact on the health level of residents with a higher education is also positive, but not significant. Third, deep RTAs mainly improve residents’ health through employment effects and environmental effects. Deep RTAs can not only improve residents’ health by increasing domestic employment but can also improve residents’ health by reducing domestic environmental pollution. There are several policy implications for the findings of this study. First, all countries should be committed to increasing the depth of their RTAs, and continue to promote the deepening development of RTAs, so as to maximize the potential role of deep RTAs in improving residents’ health. On one hand, countries should continue to expand the cover-
age of RTAs, and actively conduct regional trade agreement negotiations with potential partners. Furthermore, on the basis of strengthening trade cooperation in traditional policy areas such as tariffs and non-tariff barriers, new areas should be further strengthened, such as the environment and labor. On the other hand, countries should upgrade the RTAs they have already signed. They should not only actively promote a high degree of liberalization in the border policy areas, but should also actively incorporate the behind-border terms, such as environmental protection and labor supervision, In addition, countries should grasp the concept of the development of RTAs as a whole, formulate differentiated development strategies for different development stages, and focus on strengthening the construction of important border areas and important behind-border areas to facilitate the establishment of deep RTAs. Besides these implications, there are also some limitations in our empirical research. This study is an empirical analysis for 143 countries around the world, not a specific study. Meanwhile, this study mainly analyzes the impact mechanisms of deep free trade agreements on residents’ health from the perspectives of employment and environment, but there may be other mediating factors. 