The public sector is the largest UK landowner and space occupier with local authorities owning and managing the majority of the real estate assets to meet services to the community. As central funding of these services reduce and the knowledge economy is changing the way we live, local governments are looking at more efficient and effective ways of managing their real estate operations and creating investment value to bridge the gap between funding shortfalls and the demand for public services. Several local authorities are now investing in commercial properties as a way to generate long-term stable income streams although current practices are highlighting narrow portfolio diversification, management challenges, fee leakage and limited awareness of the knowledge economy on future real estate returns. This research paper examines the issues and provides a conceptual framework for a Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund which can create local level opportunities alongside a stable long term income stream. This can be achieved through a pooling of prime local government real estate assets to offer portfolio diversification with quality management, good governance, local authority appointed steering committee members and exposure to opportunities to benefit from aspects of the knowledge economy. Supported by central government, individual real estate assets in a Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund can provide a local destination with placemaking potential in the post COVID-19 era. Strengthening the connection between people and place, the real estate in the fund can be the catalyst for local employment opportunities and support surrounding communities. This exploratory study covers an important part of the UK economy and offers a valuable insight into creating a new real estate investment vehicle which can elevate the often underutilised prime local authority real estate assets. sovereign public sector property fund:  building a conceptual framework  david m higgins Professor of Real Estate, School of the Built Environment, Birmingham City University, Birmingham. Email:david.higgins@bcu.ac.uk abstract The public sector is the largest UK landowner and space occupier with local authorities owning and managing the majority of the real estate assets to meet services to the community. As central funding of these services reduce and the knowledge economy is changing the way we live, local governments are looking at more efficient and effective ways of managing their real estate operations and creating investment value to bridge the gap between funding shortfalls and the demand for public services. Several local authorities are now investing in commercial properties as a way to generate long-term stable income streams although current practices are highlighting narrow portfolio diversification, management challenges, fee leakage and limited awareness of the knowledge economy on future real estate returns. This research paper examines the issues and provides a conceptual framework for a Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund which can create local level opportunities alongside a stable long term income stream. This can be achieved through a pooling of prime local government real estate assets to offer portfolio diversification with quality management, good governance, local authority appointed steering committee members and exposure to opportunities to benefit from aspects of the knowledge economy. Supported by central government, individual real estate assets in a Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund can provide a local destination with placemaking potential in the post COVID-19 era. Strengthening the connection between people and place, the real estate in the fund can be the catalyst for local employment opportunities and support surrounding communities. This exploratory study covers an important part of the UK economy and offers a valuable insight into creating a new real estate investment vehicle which can elevate the often underutilised prime local authority real estate assets. Keywords: Public Sector Real Estate, Local Authorities, Portfolio Diversification Strategies, Sovereign Wealth Funds, Flexible Space Market, Property Asset Management, Unlisted Property Funds. sovereign public sector property fund:  building a conceptual framework  1. conclusion The public sector has a long complicated relationship with real estate. In highlighting past challenges, the real estate landscape is rapidly changing, principally driven by the emerging knowledge economy which offers space occupiers new operating practices. This places considerable pressure on the public sector to adapt and meet this demand led environment. This is particularly evident at a local government level, with large public sector real estate portfolios based around a community services policy agenda. Increasingly, local government is looking at their real estate assets as a funding stream to bridge the gap between the demand for public services and central government funding cuts. This is now supported by some local government actively buying prime commercial properties with low cost central government loans. The combination of past poor procurement
and asset management procedures, alongside limited diversification value, have raised questions as to this strategy. The challenge is to create a sustainable public sector real estate model that provides synergies at a local level which can benefit the public sector increased focus on real estate as an investment asset. A Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund, a combination of unlisted property fund features in a sovereign investor framework, can provide the answer. Operating with an independent board, a Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund can offer good governance and investment mandates for management implementation, with local authority representation on a steering committee to further align interests. In providing defined business units, the Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund has the opportunity to generate income within a space management team which compliments the traditional fund and asset management operation. Furthermore, refurbishments and new development projects can offer valuable opportunities for capital growth in part supported initially by central government and private debt funding arrangements. Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund benefits and risks are detailed in Table 4. As Table 4 details the challenges and opportunities, knowledge provided in this research paper can provide the groundwork for a Sovereign Public Sector Property Fund that can offer participating local authorities superior long-term stable investment returns. Alongside providing destinations and opportunities to bring forward investment in underutilised prime local authority real estate assets, leading to employment openings and support to the surrounding communities. 