The study investigated the empirical role of past values of Somalia’s GDP growth rates in its future realizations. Using the Box–Jenkins modeling method, the study utilized 250 in-sample quarterly time series data to forecast out-of-the-sample Somali GDP growth rates for fourteen quarters. Balancing between parsimony and fitness criteria of model selection, the study found Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average ARIMA (5,1,2) to be the most appropriate model to estimate and forecast the trajectory of Somali economic growth. The study sourced the GDP growth data from World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI) for the period between 1960 to 2022. The study results predict that Somalia’s GDP will, on average, experience 4 percent quarterly growth rates for the coming three and half years. To solidify the validity of the forecasting results, the study conducted several ARIMA and rolling window diagnostic tests. The model errors proved to be white noise, the moving average (MA) and Autoregressive (AR) components are covariances stationary, and the rolling window test shows model stability within a 95% confidence interval. These optimistic economic growth forecasts represent a policy dividend for the government of Somalia after almost a decade-long stick-and-carrot economic policies between strict IMF fiscal disciplinary measures and World Bank development investments on target projects. The study, however, acknowledges that the developments of current severe droughts, locust infestations, COVID-19 pandemic, internal political, and security stability, and that the active involvement of international development partners will play a crucial role in the realization of these promising growth projections. 1. conclusions and policy recommendations The study aimed at forecasting out-of-the-sample Somalia GDP growth rates for fourteen quarters using an ARIMA (5,1,2) Box–Jenkins model. The results indicate that Somalia’s economy will experience an average growth rate of about 4 percent for the next fourteen quarters. The results imply that, although affected by numerous local insecurity and political instability episodes and painful IMF austerity measures, Somalia’s decadeslong economic policy choice was prudent. In addition to expanding ARIMA forecasting literature by adding novel results of a Somalia context, the study results also inform the country’s medium-term economic policy direction. Thus, the study recommends continuing sensible fiscal discipline with optimal public sector employment targets. Moreover, the government should consider exploiting the relatively expanding investments portion of the national budget by wisely devising policy targets like institutional improvements, judicial reforms and expediting resource-sharing laws necessary for the country’s oil and gas explorations. The success of these policy priorities puts Somalia in a better position to appeal to more international attention that can accelerate the pending debt relief initiative in the short run and attract narrowly focused foreign direct investments in the long run. Although the ARIMA model results are robust and suitable for future economic forecasting, caution should be exercised in generalizing the study results due to the linear interpolations and annual data disaggregation conducted to expand the study sample and remedy missing observation limitations. Furthermore, the scope of the study results is limited to GDP growth-forecasting and may not be used to extrapolate for wider development aspects that are currently critical for Somalia, such as poverty reduction and youth employment.