This research article examines the impact of stock market capitalization on carbon emissions using forty high carbon-emitting countries from 1996 to 2018. This study adopts the Driscoll-Kraay method that simultaneously tackles heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation, and contemporaneous correlation issues. We find an inverted U relationship between stock market capitalization (SMC) and environmental degradation. We propose an extended environmental Kuznets curve based on SMC while energy intensity, industrialization, and urbanization increase emissions in sample countries. The quadratic method, SLM test, and derivative graphing detect the consensus of the inverted U relationship. The weak-negative SMC2 coefficient reveals that the dangerous impact of capitalization declines gradually and finally curbs the environmental degradation challenges. The relationship is strong in highly polluted countries with overvalued stock markets. The study catches no policy synergies between the growing stock market and increased carbon emissions. Stock market capitalization should be integrated into climate change adaptation strategies at national and regional levels, primarily to address the dark effect of environmental degradation. conclusions.  We claim financial environment is essential for reducing environmental degradation (Paramati et al. 2018). Our findings indicate an asymmetric
Table 3 Result of XTPCSE and XtSCC
O.L.S. robust: Panel A consists of the top 40 CO2 emitters globally, per the 2018 ranking. Weighted least squares (column 2). XTPCSE FE (column 3); fixed effect, XTSCC (column 4). Tackle issue of heteroscedasticity and contemporaneous correlation and autocorrelation at a time): Panel B consists of the top 10 CO2 emitter globally as per the 2018 ranking. Panel C consists of the top 10 ranked high stock market to capitalization to GDP percentage as of 2018. SLM test is inverted U relationship testing; threshold means the second-order derivatives where the relationship is inverse. Fieller’s confidence shows absolute term. S.L.M. Sig. The p-value of the hypothesis of inverted U. T state is given in (). We also tested the quadratic term of LGDPPC for testing and found EKC presence as the relationship has inverted U (result not provided) relationship of SMC and CO2 has the potential for a synergy effect, and SMC efficiency further reduces environmental degradation. conclusion This study is based on forty countries’ samples from 1996 to 2018. Different methodologies reveal that industry, energy intensity, and urbanization increase CO2 emission while GDPPC and stock market capitalization have an inverted U-shape relationship with CO2 emissions. The inverted U-shape relationship between SMC and CO2 justifies that a higher level of stock market capitalization proves environmentally friendly. We find an inverted U-shape relationship between SMC and environmental degradation and propose an extended EKC based on the SMC philosophy. The quartic term of SMC is negative, revealing that policymakers should devise policies to uplift the SMC by better regulation for the mutual benefit of investors and firms. The stock market efficiency proves environmentally friendly. Stock market-rated policies, irrespective of jurisdictional confinement, are urgently needed by today’s industrialized society to address the environmental degradation crisis, and aggregate data shows Europe is on the right track. Despite substantial political and ideological conflicts, the European
Emission Trading Scheme, carbon taxation, and green finance facilities simultaneously enhance investor confidence and business sustainability. In this regard, Sachs et al. (2019) emphasize the significance of massive public and private investment to transition to a low-carbon, green economy. Policymakers need to set a policy to incentivize firms pursuing renewable energy options, adopt green energy initiatives, and provide emission disclosure for investors. The policy should be based on ratings, and green initiative firms must be given high ratings. We faced two types of limitations in our study. The first is the sample size; our sample is purposive based on forty high carbon-emitting countries from 1996 to 2018. The balance panel data was unavailable before 1998, so the sample size is limited to < 1000 observations. We restrict the data before 2019 because COVID-19 impacts all countries’ GDP, which ultimately impacts emissions, so the inclusion of recent data may provide misleading results.