The limited solubility and stability of pea proteins hinder their utilization in liquid formulations. In this study, protein glutaminase (PG) was employed to modify pea protein isolates (PPIs) and obtain deamidated PPI with varying degrees of deamidation (DD, 10–25%). The solubility and thermal stability of these deamidated PPI samples were assessed, and a comprehensive analysis, including SDS-PAGE, zeta potential, FTIR, surface hydrophobicity, and intrinsic fluorescence, was conducted to elucidate the mechanism behind the improvement in their functional properties. The results reveal that PG modification greatly enhances the solubility and heat stability of PPI, with the most notable improvements observed at higher DD (>20%). PG modification increases the net charge of PPI, leading to the unfolding and extension of the protein structures, thus exposing more hydrophobic groups. These structural changes are particularly pronounced when DD exceeds 20%. This increased electrostatic repulsion between carboxyl groups would promote protein unfolding, enhancing interactions with water and hindering the aggregation of unfolded protein in the presence of salts at elevated temperatures (supported by high-performance size exclusion chromatography and transmission electron microscopy). Accordingly, PG-mediated deamidation shows promise in enhancing the functional properties of PPI. 1. conclusions Pea proteins were isolated from raw pea seeds and subsequently subjected to deamidation using PG enzyme, resulting in deamidated pea protein isolates (DPPIs) with varying degrees of deamidation (DD, 10–25%). The deamidation process significantly improved the solubility and heat stability of the DPPI samples when compared to the unmodified pea protein isolates (PPIs), with the most substantial enhancements observed in the DPPI samples with higher DDs (20% and 25%). The transformation of amide groups into carboxyl groups during deamidation induced a certain degree of protein unfolding, exposing more hydrophobic regions, while the secondary structure remained unchanged. Consequently, the enhanced solubility and heat stability can be attributed to the heightened electrostatic repulsion between carboxyl groups. This repulsion promotes protein unfolding, facilitates protein–water interactions, and inhibits the aggregation of unfolded proteins in the presence of salts at elevated temperatures. These characteristics suggest that deamidated PPI holds promise as a plant-derived protein ingredient suitable for liquid formulas, such as drink and dairy milk substitute. Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: www.mdpi.com/xxx/s1, Figure S1: Original (dotted line) and curve fitting spectra (solid line) of amide Ⅰ of FTIR for pea protein isolates (PPI) samples (Samples Corresponding to Each Figure Indicated in upper right corner: NPPI, unmodified PPI; HPPI, heat PPI control; D10 ~ D25, deamidated PPI with degree of deamidation Ranging from 10% to 25%). Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.L. and P.L. ; Formal analysis, L.L. ; Funding acquisition, M.Z. ; Methodology, L.L. and P.Z. ; Project administration, Y.D., P.L. and M.Z. ; Supervision, Y.D., P.L. and M.Z. ; Validation, L.L. ; Visualization, P.L. ; Writing—original draft, L.L. ; Writing—review and editing, G.L., Z.Z., P.L. and M.Z. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32001691), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2020A1515110641), the Special Fund for Scientific Innovation Strategy-Construction of High Level Academy of Agriculture Science (R2020PYJX009, R2019YJ-YB1001, R2021PY-QF007), Innovative Research Team Construction Project for Modern Agricultural Industry Common Key Technologies of Guangdong Province (2023KJ117), the Program for Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Enterpreneurial Teams (2019BT02N112), and Agricultural Competitive Industry Discipline Team Building Project of Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences (202108TD). Figure 7. Schematic depiction of the mechanism for improvement in solubility and heat stability of PPI after deamidation. Upon heating at 80 ◦C, the PPI samples, primarily consisting of globular proteins, would undergo thermal unfolding process. The exposed activ groups would result in ex ensive protein aggregation, form g large and insoluble protein aggregate . In contrast, the increase in charged carboxyl groups in the DPPI s ples would hinder protein–protein interactions due to he strong electros atic repulsion. This, in turn, prevents the extensive pr tein aggregation during heat treatment. In the absence of salt ions, the mild increase charge in the DPPI samples with low DD (10%) could not effectively prevent th p tein eracti ns, thus resulting in limited protein aggregations. How ver, in he presence of 0.1 mol/L NaCl, the increased charge in th low-DD DPPI amples (both DD 10% and 15%) is scr en d, resulting in protein aggreg tion. It is worth to note that DPPI samples with high DDs (20% and 25%) inhi it the heat-induced aggregation regardless of the presenc of ions. This inhibition could be attributed to the retention of the r sidual charges even after screening by ions. The consistent trends observed in zeta potential, intrinsic fluorescence, solubility, turbidity, and molecular weight distribution properties indicate that a DD of around 20% can lead to significant alternations in pea protein structure and result in substantial changes in their functional properties. 4. conclusions Pea proteins w e i olated from raw pea seeds and subsequently subjected to deamidation using PG enzyme, resulting in deamidated pea protein isolates (DPPIs) with varying grees of deamidation (DD, 10–25%). Th dea idati n pr cess significantly improv the solubility and heat stability of the DPPI samples whe c mpared to the unmodified pea protein isolates (PPIs), with the ost substantial enhancements observed in the DPPI samples with higher DDs (20% and 25%). The transformation of amide groups into carboxyl groups during deamidation induc d certain degree of protein unfolding, exposing more hydrophobic regions, while the secondary st ucture emained unchanged. Consequently, the enhanced solubility and heat stability can be attributed to the heightened electrostatic repulsion between carboxyl groups. This repulsion promotes protein unfolding, facilitates protein–water interactions, and inhibits the aggregation of unfolded proteins in the presence of salts at elevated temperatures. These characteristics suggest that deamidated PPI holds promise s a plant-derived protein ingredient suitable for liquid formulas, such as drink and dairy milk substitute.