Reactive sulfane sulfur (RSS), including persulfide, polysulfide, and elemental sulfur (S8), has important physiological functions, such as resisting antibiotics in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli and regulating secondary metabolites production in Streptomyces spp. However, at excessive levels it is toxic. Streptomyces cells may use known enzymes to remove extra sulfane sulfur, and an unknown regulator is involved in the regulation of these enzymes. AdpA is a multi-functional transcriptional regulator universally present in Streptomyces spp. Herein, we report that AdpA was essential for Streptomyces coelicolor survival when facing external RSS stress. AdpA deletion also resulted in intracellular RSS accumulation. Thioredoxins and thioredoxin reductases were responsible for anti-RSS stress via reducing RSS to gaseous hydrogen sulfide (H2S). AdpA directly activated the expression of these enzymes at the presence of excess RSS. Since AdpA and thioredoxin systems are widely present in Streptomyces, this finding unveiled a new mechanism of anti-RSS stress by 1. conclusions Sulfane–sulfur compounds containing active sulfur atoms with a valence state of 0 or −1 are common components of cells. Sulfane sulfur is the inducer of numerous regulatory factors and participates in many physiological functions and metabolic pathways. Given the oxidizing and reducing properties of sulfane sulfur, it can be both oxidant and antioxidant. A high concentration of sulfane sulfur causes oxidative stress response and damages cells. In this study, we demonstrated that the global regulator AdpA was critical for eliminating excessive RSS in S. coelicolor. The sensitivity of adpA deletion mutant to sulfur stress was significantly increased and the endogenous RSS accumulated in the mutant. Streptomyces has multiple pathways and enzymes to protect itself from oxidative stress, of which the thioredoxin systems are commonly involved. Overexpression of these thioredoxin systems resulted in more H2S release in S. coelicolor. The results showed that thioredoxin systems affected sulfur metabolism and reduced intracellular RSS. In addition, AdpA significantly activated the expression of thioredoxins and thioredoxin reductases to deal with sulfur stress. Overall, we found that AdpA has the regulatory function to promote sulfane sulfur reduction and maintain redox balance. This discovery further expands the pathway of antioxidant regulation in Streptomyces. 