Recent findings qualified aldehydes as potential biomarkers for disease diagnosis. One of the possibilities is to use electrochemical biosensors in point-of-care (PoC), but these need further development to overcome some limitations. Currently, the primary goal is to enhance their metrological parameters in terms of sensitivity and selectivity. Previous findings indicate that peptide OBPP4 (KLLFDSLTDLKKKMSEC-NH2) is a promising candidate for further development of aldehyde-sensitive biosensors. To increase the affinity of a receptor layer to long-chain aldehydes, a structure stabilization of the peptide active site via the incorporation of different linkers was studied. Indeed, the incorporation of linkers improved sensitivity to and binding of aldehydes in comparison to that of the original peptide-based biosensor. The tendency to adopt disordered structures was diminished owing to the implementation of suitable linkers. Therefore, to improve the metrological characteristics of peptide-based piezoelectric biosensors, linkers were added at the C-terminus of OBPP4 peptide (KLLFDSLTDLKKKMSE-linker-C-NH2). hose linkers consist of proteinogenic amino acids from group one: glycine, L-proline, L-serine, and non proteinogenic amino acids from group two: β-alanine, 4-aminobutyric acid, and 6-aminohexanoic acid. Linkers were evaluated with in silico studies, followed by experimental verification. All studied linkers enhanced the detection of aldehydes in the gas phase. The highest difference in frequency (60 Hz, nonanal) was observed between original peptide-based biosensors and ones based on peptides modified with the GSGSGS linker. It allowed evaluation of the limit of detection for nonanal at the level of 2 ppm, which is nine times lower than that of the original peptide. The highest sensitivity values were also obtained for the GSGSGS linker: 0.3312, 0.4281, and 0.4676 Hz/ppm for pentanal, octanal, and nonanal, respectively. An order of magnitude increase in sensitivity was observed for the six linkers used. Generally, the linker’s rigidity and the number of amino acid residues are much more essential for biosensors’ metrological characteristics than the amino acid sequence itself. It was found that the longer the linkers, the better the effect on docking efficiency. 1. conclusions This article concerns an increase in biosensors’ sensitivity to aldehydes via the incorporation of ifferent linker types et een the e tide rece tor a -ter inal cysteine resi e i i f . is is t e first study where the effect of linker incorporation i to the pe tide s quence was u ed to increas the bind g affinity of gas molecul s. Suitable optimization of the length and sequence of a linker chain allows improvement of sensitivity to the long-chain ldehydes present i the gas phase. A biosensor with a GSGSGS linker incorporated into the OBPP4 peptide exhibited LOD comparable to sensors Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 10610 17 of 20 reported in the literature. It is noteworthy that its usage does not require long exposure time to the gas phase and pre-heating stages. Essentially, the presented strategy of stabilization of the peptide’s receptor structure via the introduction of the linker is universal and should be compatible with other biosensor platforms. Theoretically, it is impossible to take into account all interactions occurring during ligands docking; there are indeed discrepancies between in silico docking and experimental results. A key to the actual tuning of receptor vs. ligand affinity is experimental studies with gas mixtures. Summarizing, the addition of the linker to the peptide’s structure provides more effective docking of volatile ligands; glycine-serine linkers provide the highest increase in affinity, which yielded an increase in biosensor’s sensitivity by ca. 15% with respect to the original peptide. The highest sensitivity values were also obtained for the GSGSGS linker: 0.3312, 0.4281, and 0.4676 Hz/ppm for pentanal, octanal, and nonanal, respectively. Generally, the dependence between the rigidity of a linker and the number of amino acid residues is much more pronounced than variations in a sequence. It was found that longer linkers had a better influence on docking effectiveness; the selection of the linkers with suitable length and sequence can constitute an additional aspect during the construction of more effective peptide-based biosensors for gas substances.