Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) are a protein family with a wide variety of roles and binding partners. Among them, TRAF6, a ubiquitin ligase, possesses unique receptor binding specificity and shows diverse functions in immune system regulation, cellular signaling, central nervous system, and tumor formation. TRAF6 consists of an N-terminal Really Interesting New Gene (RING) domain, multiple zinc fingers, and a C-terminal TRAF domain. TRAF6 is an important therapeutic target for various disorders and structural studies of this protein are crucial for the development of next-generation therapeutics. Here, we presented a TRAF6 Nterminal structure determined at the Turkish light source “Turkish DeLight” to be 3.2 Å resolution at cryogenic temperature (PDB ID: 8HZ2). This structure offers insight into the domain organization and zinc-binding, which are critical for protein function. Separately, we rationally designed numerous new compounds and performed molecular docking studies using this template (PDB ID:8HZ2). According to the results, 10 new compounds formed key interactions with essential residues and zinc ion in the N-terminal region of TRAF6. Molecular dynamic (MD) simulations were performed for 300 ns to evaluate the stability of three docked complexes (compounds 256, 322, and 489). Compounds 256 and 489 was found to possess favorable bindings with TRAF6. These new compounds also showed moderate to good pharmacokinetic profiles, making them potential future drug candidates as TRAF6 inhibitors. 1. conclusions RING domain and zinc fingers of TRAF6 mediate the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB), which has essential roles in the regulation of inflammatory responses, proliferation, differentiation, migration, cell adhesion, and apoptosis. Therefore, it has been found that TRAF6 is overexpressed in various types of cancer including pancreatic, liver, lung, head and neck, breast, colorectal cancers, and melanoma along with inflammatory, autoimmune and neurodegenerative disorders. Therefore, examining and knowing the accurate protein structure can guide us in understanding the exact mechanism of action. The current research manifested the characteristics of the RING domain organization and zinc-binding of TRAF6, shedding light on the crucial functions of the protein. This study encouraged us to carry out further molecular docking studies with TRAF6 and new SN-1 derivatives based on the fact that SN-1 is a potential TRAF6 inhibitor developed by our research group. Results showed that in particular methylsulfonyl and carboxylate carrying compound 256 showed remarkable binding efficacy to the N-terminal region of TRAF6. MD simulations revealed that compound 322 did not form a stable complex while compounds 256 and 489 had favorable bindings with TRAF6. Compound 256 also exhibited appropriate pharmakinetic profile making it as a potential drug-like TRAF6 inhibitor. 