Phenolic compounds have recently gained interest, as they have been related to improvements in health and disease prevention, such as inflammatory intestinal pathologies and obesity. However, their bioactivity may be limited by their instability or low concentration in food matrices and along the gastrointestinal tract once consumed. This has led to the study of technological processing with the aim of optimizing phenolic compounds’ biological properties. In this sense, different extraction systems have been applied to vegetable sources for the purpose of obtaining enriched phenolic extracts such as PLE, MAE, SFE, and UAE. In addition, many in vitro and in vivo studies evaluating the potential mechanisms of these compounds have also been published. This review includes a case study of the Hibiscus genera as an interesting source of phenolic compounds. The main goal of this work is to describe: (a) phenolic compound extraction by designs of experiments (DoEs) applied to conventional and advanced systems; (b) the influence of the extraction system on the phenolic composition and, consequently, on the bioactive properties of these extracts; and (c) bioaccessibility and bioactivity evaluation of Hibiscus phenolic extracts. The results have pointed out that the most used DoEs were based on response surface methodologies (RSM), mainly the Box–Behnken design (BBD) and central composite design (CCD). The chemical composition of the optimized enriched extracts showed an abundance of flavonoids, as well as anthocyanins and phenolic acids. In vitro and in vivo studies have highlighted their potent bioactivity, with particular emphasis on obesity and related disorders. This scientific evidence establishes the Hibiscus genera as an interesting source of phytochemicals with demonstrated bioactive potential for the development of functional foods. 1. conclusions may be taken with certain reservations, as the determinant values were obtained through non-selective analytical evaluation, and more specific methodologies, such as HPLC systems, were not considered. In fact, this selective analytical methodology was considered in other studies which evaluated the efficiency of PLE, CO2-SFE, and MAE techniques [33–35]. In these studies, SFE and MAE extracts were analyzed by HPLC-ESITOF-MS, while PLE extracts were characterized using HPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS. In this case, anthocyanins were only identified in PLE extractions [35], as SFE did not consider their analysis [33], and in MAE, a degradation of these compounds was observed as a result of extreme extraction conditions [34]. From the selected articles, it can be concluded that PLE is the most optimal extraction method for anthocyanins, even despite the slight degradation that was observed when a high extraction temperature and increased time was applied. Foods 2023, 12, 963 9 of 15 Lastly, the extraction of phenolic acids from Hibiscus sabdariffa was also considered for optimization with different extraction techniques [33–35]. The principal identified compounds were neochlorogenic acid, chlorogenic acid, caffeoylshikimic acid, and coumarouylquinic acid. Of all the considered extraction techniques, SFE proved to be the least efficient, as extraction of these phenolic acids was quite limited. This was also observed for caffeoylshikimic acid and cumaroilquinic acid when PLE was the selected technique for extraction. On the contrary, the extraction yield of chlorogenic and neochlorogenic acid was higher with PLE. This could be related to the nature of the optimized extraction conditions for PLE, which seem not to be adequate for the extraction of the former, but more focused on the extraction of the latter. Thus, a better recovery of all the mentioned phenolic acids was achieved when optimized conditions for MAE were evaluated [34]. The combination of different response variables, such as high recovery of total phenolic compounds, flavonoids, and anthocyanins, and considering the maximum TPC, TFC, and TAC, could lead to optimized conditions for the selected technique, making it the most promising for a more complete and efficient extraction of phenolic compounds. As a conclusion, UAE exhibited the best TPC, followed by PLE and SFE. Nevertheless, PLE appears to be the most adequate technique for recovering flavonoids, anthocyanins, and phenolic acids from Hibiscus plants. In addition, it must be highlighted that the analytical technique used for characterization is another crucial parameter to be considered for the optimization of the polyphenols’ extraction efficiency. 3.2. bioactivity evaluation of hibiscus phenolic compounds In vitro and in vivo studies have been considered in order to evaluate the bioactivity of Hibiscus phenolic compounds. In this sense, most of the studies on the target compounds have focused on the treatment or prevention of obesity (Table 2). Through in vitro studies, adipocytes have been selected as cell models to study this pathology. In this sense, the potential effect of phenolic-rich Hibiscus extracts and some metabolites to alleviate obesityrelated metabolic complications was evaluated in a 3T3-L1 adipocyte culture [38]. The capacity of these metabolites to activate AMP-activated protein kinases (AMPK) and to modulate lipid metabolism and mitochondrial function was included in this study. These results pointed out that quercetin and its derivatives exhibited effects in the expression and activity of proteins related to energetic and lipidic metabolism. In addition, the mentioned compounds showed a regulating activity on lipid metabolism through the induction of its catabolism. These authors postulated that these compounds increase PPARα expression, a central regulator of lipid metabolism. The potential beneficial effects of Hibiscus phenolic compounds on obesity through microbiota modulation have also been demonstrated by in vitro evaluation. Indeed, the study of different aspects of gut microbiota has gained importance, as it has proved to be a central element of obesity. Therefore, an increase in Firmicutes spp. can be observed in people with obesity, as these microorganisms are related to a better energetic exploitation of food, resulting in an alteration of the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio. In this way, the in vitro study presented by Silva et al., 2022 investigated the impact of Metabolaid®, a polyphenol-enriched supplement composed of hibiscus (Hibiscus sabdariffa) and lemon verbena (Lippia citriodora), on gut microbiota composition and functionality. This research was performed by fermentations with human fecal microbiota under gut-simulated conditions [39]. Phenolic extract administration resulted in a modulation of the microbial profile. The promoting changes in fecal microbiota included a significant increase in Bifidobacterium and the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio. Furthermore, changes in the presence of Prevotella and Akkermansia were also observed. The populations of these genera, which have been recently associated with obesity, were reduced in the treatment group as compared with the control, in which their presence remained stable. Thus, these authors found that administration of phenolic-rich hibiscus extracts exhibited an effect that could aid in the prevention of obesity through modulation of the microbiota composition. These bioactive properties were related Foods 2023, 12, 963 10 of 15 to the presence of both anthocyanins and phenolic acids, and have been further reported through in vitro dynamic studies, as thoroughly described in the following section [40]. Concerning in vivo obesity studies, both animal models and human clinical trials have been described in the literature. With regards to animal models, studies high fat–sugar diet-induced obese rats and hamsters were proposed to evaluate the potential effects of polyphenol-rich Hibiscus extracts on obesity and related biochemical parameters. The administration of Hibiscus phenolic compounds to Wistar Kyoto rats showed a marked reduction in weight gain and oxidative stress [41]. Lipidic peroxidation was also reduced by the administered extract. This effect was proven to be a result of the restoration of reduced glutathione levels (GSH) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) by phenolic acids and flavonoids. Furthermore, a dose-dependent anti-obesity effect of Hibiscus sabdariffa extract was also reported in hamsters [42]. Hibiscus extracts have also been evaluated by in vivo human interventions to ameliorate obesity-induced metabolic disturbances. Their application was studied in a double blind, placebo-controlled, and randomized trial on obese and overweight subjects [44]. The combined administration with Lippia citriodora phenolic compounds identified significant improvements in body weight, abdominal circumference of overweight subjects, and body fat percentages. The Hibiscus phytochemicals were also related to appetite regulation. Administration of phenolic rich hibiscus extracts to an overweight and obese grade-I population resulted in an improvement in the regulation of obesity through an increase in the secretion of hormones and intestinal peptides related to appetite (such as GLP-1, PYY, and ghrelin) [45,46]. In vitro and in vivo approaches have also been used to study the bioactive effects of hibiscus on other pathologies (Table 3). As related to in vitro assays, neuroprotection by Hibiscus phenolic compounds has been evaluated as an important potential therapy for multiple sclerosis [47]. Human and rat neuron cultures were exposed to ferrous iron and Hibiscus sabdariffa phenolic compounds. These authors highlighted that anthocyanin prevented iron neurotoxicity. Additionally, hydroquinone, naringenic acid, parahidroxibenzaldehide, fumaric acid, and vainillinic acid from hibiscus improved neuro-inflammation in a SH-S5Y5 neuronal cell line [48]. Foods 2023, 12, 963 11 of 15 With respect to atherosclerosis, Hibiscus phenolic compounds have shown in vitro modulation of the proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Indeed, Chou and co-workers reported that these Hibiscus phytochemicals abolished TNFα-induced metalloproteinase (MMP-9) expression and cell migration by inhibiting the protein kinase PKB pathway [49]. This research confirmed the in vitro results by an in vivo assay developed with New Zealand white male rabbits. Huang et al., 2016, examined the preventive effect of Hibiscus phenolic compounds on insulin resistance linked to epithelial– mesenchymal transition. They concluded that these compounds could be adjuvants to prevent diabetic nephropathy (HK-2 kidney in vitro culture) [51]. Furthermore, hibiscus extracts exhibited an inhibitory effect on colon carcinoma [52,53] and antiviral activity against HSV-2 clinical isolates through the inhibition of VHS replication [54]. Animal in vivo studies have also proven the potential bioactivity of these extracts. Hibiscus extracts have been found to have an effect on the improvement of diabetes. Administration of a phenolic-rich Hibiscus extract demonstrated an improvement of cardiac function in a type-I diabetes rat model [50]. A significant reduction in coronary flow and lower pressure on the left ventricle were observed, improving cardiac contractility and relaxation rate. In addition, this extract reduced the presence of reactive oxygen species, thus preventing the development of other related pathologies, such as obesity. This bioactivity, as well as a cardioprotective effect, were attributed to the composition of quercetin, rutin, and two main anthocyanins: cyanidin-3-glucoside and cyanidin-3-O-glucosil-rutinoside. An additional study was carried out on the same rat model, where phenolic compounds such as myricetin, syringic acid, ferulic acid, ellagic acid, caffeic acid, and cinnamic acid modulated diabetic-related signal pathways, lowered stress, and improved obesity pre- Foods 2023, 12, 963 12 of 15 vention [43]. Male Wistar rats were used as animal models for evaluating antioxidant effects of different dosages of phenolic compounds from Hibiscus sabdariffa [55]. The anthocyanin content of hibiscus extracts were also shown to protect against deleterious effects of lead intoxication in the livers and kidneys of Wistar rats [53]. Lastly, polyphenolic compounds from Hibiscus sabdariffa extract produced an inhibition effect on colon carcinoma metastasis in Balb/c-nude rats [52]. 3.3. bioaccessibility and microbiota interaction of phenolic compounds from hibiscus The bioactivity of phenolic compounds, and, more specifically, Hibiscus phenolic extracts, as well as their impact on multiple pathologies, was summarized in the previous section. However, these implications are highly dependent on the ability of phenolic extracts to reach specific areas of action. Once polyphenols are released from the food matrix, their instability under gastrointestinal conditions (pH or enzymatic activity) greatly reduces their bioaccessibility and bioavailability, thus impairing the achievement of their desired activities. In this way, a wide range of factors affects phenolic stability, such as chemical structure, interaction with other compounds present in the food matrix, presence of precursors, biological conditions, the nature of the absorption process, or, more importantly, even the interaction with the existing microbiota. As far as Hibiscus phenolic compounds are concerned, a small number of studies have conducted research to obtain a better understanding of their complex and high bioaccessibility under simulated gastrointestinal digestion. The standardized digestion protocol Infogest was applied to establish the upper gastrointestinal digestion of Hibiscus phenolic extracts [56]. High bioaccessibility of phenolic acids, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and related metabolites was reported. These compounds are abundant in pre-digested hibiscus extracts and, more importantly, have been identified as responsible for most their biological activities. Dynamic models have also been used for evaluating the gastrointestinal digestion of these phytochemicals, allowing simulation of the full gastrointestinal tract from stomach to colon [39,40]. In these studies, colonic microbiota mediated phenolic bioconversion of Hibiscus extracts. As has previously been described, phenolic extract administration resulted in a modulation of the microbial profile. These investigations suggested that these phenolic compounds showed antimicrobial activity, microbiota modulation, and, more specifically, obesity-related microbiota effects (phenolic acids, anthocyanins). Indeed, the dynamic in vitro human gastrointestinal simulations reported that phenolic acids, flavonoids, and anthocyanins were able to have a modulating effect on colonic microbiota composition. Prior to in vitro fermentation, 45 bacterial genera were identified, with postfermentation results presenting significant variations in 10 of them. Mainly, a high recount of Bifidobacteirum, Bacteroides, Catenibacterium, and Lactobacillus were observed. In this sense, the increase in Bacteroides was inhibited after 24 h digestion due to the antimicrobial activity of Hibiscus sabdariffa. Thus, phenolic compounds from its extract were able to promote the genera Bifidobacteirum and Lactobacillus while significantly reducing the presence of Bacteroides. The anthocyanin and phenolic acid contents in hibiscus extracts were able to modulate microbiota, with a significant impact on obesity. Thus, as can be observed, although the bioaccessibility of hibiscus extracts has not been widely researched, these extracts have proven to be high in significant bioactive phenolic compounds, reported phenolic acids, flavonoids, and anthocyanins. These bioaccessible hibiscus compounds have also been proven to have a modulating effect on colonic microbiota, which poses them as potential sources of compounds for improving gut health. 4. conclusions Hibiscus sabdariffa has proven to be a promising plant source of an abundance of phenolic compounds, from flavonoids such as myricetin, quercetin, and derivatives; phenolic acids, especially caffeic, chlorogenic, coumaroylquinic, gallic, and ellagic acids; and anthocyanins, such as delphinidin, cyanidin, and derivatives. The best extraction methodology Foods 2023, 12, 963 13 of 15 for maximum total polyphenol recovery was UAE, whereas PLE was the most adequate technique for recovering flavonoids, anthocyanins, and phenolic acids. In fact, PLE reported a high extraction yield for all studied compounds; thus, it should be proposed for a combined extraction from Hibiscus polyphenols. On the contrary, CO2-SFE seemed to be the least efficient for obtaining enriched phenolic extracts from Hibiscus. Moreover, the extraction of these compounds appears to be essential for their bioactivity, as their effects on recorded pathologies such as obesity are related to their content in the mentioned compounds.