An evaluation of the expression and predictive significance of the MDM2 gene in brain lower-grade glioma (LGG) cancer was carried out using onco-informatics pipelines. Several transcriptome servers were used to measure the differential expression of the targeted MDM2 gene and search mutations and copy number variations. GENT2, Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis, Onco-Lnc, and PrognoScan were used to figure out the survival rate of LGG cancer patients. The protein–protein interaction networks between MDM2 gene and its co-expressed genes were constructed by Gene-MANIA tool. Identified bioactive phytochemicals were evaluated through molecular docking using Schrödinger Suite Software, with the MDM2 (PDB ID: 1RV1) target. Protein– ligand interactions were observed with key residues of the macromolecular target. A molecular dynamics simulation of the novel bioactive compounds with the targeted protein was performed. Phytochemicals targeting MDM2 protein, such as Taxifolin and (-)-Epicatechin, have been shown with more highly stable results as compared to the control drug, and hence, concluded that phytochemicals with bioactive potential might be alternative therapeutic options for the management of LGG patients. Our once informatics-based designed pipeline has indicated that the MDM2 gene may have been a predictive biomarker for LGG cancer and selected phytochemicals possessed outstanding interaction results within the macromolecular target’s active site after utilizing in silico approaches. In vitro and in vivo experiments are recommended to confirm these outcomes. 1. conclusions In this study, the aim was to precisely check the elevated level of MDM2 gene in LGG disease compared to the standard samples and based on a variety of clinicopathological properties. Consequently, several integrative bioinformatics web-based tools were applied to publicly accessible datasets, revealing that MDM2 may be an effective prognostic biomarker for this disease to determine the frequency of promoter methylation varies dramatically across the various phases of LGG. The level of methylation was greater in tumor samples compared to the normal or standard samples. The MDM2 gene’s prognostic significance for LGG was determined using a KM plotter from multiple websites, including the ULCAN, Onco-Lnc, GENT2, and GEPIA; therefore, the survival plots from multiple databases demonstrated that MDM2 expression might play a role in LGG development and prognosis. So, it is a major prognostic biomarker and acts as an alternative therapeutic site for the control of the advanced level of brain cancer. Additionally, the virtual mediated ADMET screening was used to identify 3 phytocompounds out of 50 that were predicted to have the most drug-like features. According to the results of the molecular docking study, these ligand molecules have the maximum binding affinity against the targeted receptor. This result was comparable to that of the reference anti-brain cancer medicine, Temozolomide. These pharmacological analogues, including Taxifolin, (-)-epicatechin, and Galangin, maintained more persistent and compact connections with the residues in the active region of MDM2 protein. The MD simulation was performed to confirm that these molecules have the best activity toward the targeted receptor, and they showed more positive results. As a result, they may be capable of overcoming the developing of LGG cancer. 