Standard therapies for colorectal cancer cannot eliminate or sufficiently reduce the metastasis process. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) may be an alternative to minimizing this problem. Here, we examined the cellular localization of selected porphyrins and determined whether free-base and manganese (III) metallated porphyrins may limit colon cancer cells’ (HT29) or normal colon epithelial cells’ (CCD 841 CoTr) motility in vitro. White light irradiation was used to initiate the photodynamic effect. Porphyrin uptake by the cells was determined by porphyrin fluorescence measurements through the use of confocal microscopy. Free-base porphyrin was found in cells, where it initially localized at the edge of the cytoplasm and later in the perinuclear area. The concentrations of porphyrins had no effect on cancer cell migration but had a significant effect on normal cell motility. Due to the low concentrations of porphyrins used, no changes in F-actin filaments of the cellular cytoskeleton were detected. Signal transmission via connexons between neighbouring cells was limited to a maximum of 40 μm for HT29 and 30 μm for CCD 841 CoTr cells. The tested porphyrins differed in their activity against the tumor and normal cells’ migration capacity. Depending on the porphyrin used and the type of cells, their migration changed in relation to the control sample. The use of white light may change the activity of the porphyrins relative to the migratory capacity of the cells. The aim of the present study was to analyse the intracellular localization of tested porphyrins and their influence on the mobility of cells after irradiation with harmless white light. 1. conclusions In conclusion, these studies were successful in determining the localization of freebase porphyrin in the tested colon cells. Besides photodynamic effects, inhibition of cell Molecules 2023, 28, 2907 14 of 17 migration by porphyrins can play a crucial role in the overall mechanism of colon tumor death. Due to the low concentrations of the applied porphyrins, no changes in the cellular cytoskeleton were observed. It has been shown that the mobility of normal cells exposed to porphyrins and white light irradiation is limited. Neoplastic cells, due to their origin from the early stages of tumor development, were not characterized by an intensive migration capacity; thus, no clear effect of porphyrins on this cell feature was observed. The presence of porphyrins at low concentration in the microenvironment of normal and neoplastic cells did not significantly affect transmission via connexons. This work suggests that the influence of porphyrins on colon cell migration depends not only on the type of porphyrin (containing a metal ion or not) and the method of its excitation, but also on the type of cells they affect and, very importantly, the concentrations of these macrocyclic compounds. 