The current investigation is focused on the development of composite membranes based on polymeric ionic liquids (PILs) containing imidazolium and pyridinium polycations with various counterions, including hexafluorophosphate, tetrafluoroborate, and bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide. A combination of spectroscopic methods was used to identify the synthesized PILs and characterize their interaction with carbon dioxide. The density and surface free energy of polymers were performed by wettability measurements, and the results are in good agreement with the permeability and selectivity obtained within the gas transport tests. It was shown that the membranes with a selective layer based on PILs exhibit relatively high permeability with CO2 and high ideal selectivity CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2. Additionally, it was found that the type of an anion significantly affects the performance of the obtained membranes, with the most pronounced effect from bis-triflimide-based polymers, showing the highest permeability coefficient. These results provide valuable insights into the design and optimization of PIL-based membranes for natural and flue gas treatment. 1. conclusions PILs have recently emerged as a promising platform for various separation applications due to a combination of their polymeric nature with a unique property of ILs—the ability to capture CO2. In this study, the design and performance of composite membranes based on imidazolium and pyridinium polycationic salts with different anions, such as hexafluorophosphate, tetrafluoroborate, and bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, were investigated. PILs were synthesized using a simple ion exchange reaction from a basic polymer precursor, pVBCl. It was found that the functionalization degree and anion exchange degree depend on the nature of substitute. The formation of PILs was confirmed by a combination of NMR and ATR-FTIR spectroscopy. ATR-FTIR was also used to characterize PILs interaction with CO2. Several studies [56,58] have previously reported chemosorption of CO2 by ILs containing Tf2N and carboxylate anions. Spectroscopic data on PILs interaction with CO2 is more in favor of physisorption in the case of polymerized ionic liquids. Properties of the synthetized PILs and gas separation properties of PIL-based composite membranes are summarized in Table 6. * “-”—was not measured. In general, PILs showed properties comparable to the previously reported (Table 1) properties and could be further investigated as a membrane matrix material. PILs that contain Tf2N− anions exhibited superior separation performance compared to other polymers. Membranes 2023, 13, 539 15 of 18 