Graphitic phase carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is a promising photocatalytic environmental material. For this study, the graphitic phase carbon nitride was prepared using a thermal polymerization method. The characteristic peaks, structures, and morphologies were determined using Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), X-ray diffractometry (XRD), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), respectively. Under the synergetic visible light catalysis of H2O2 and Na2S2O8, the degradation effects of g-C3N4 on the anionic dye methyl orange (MO) and the cationic dye rhodamine b (Rhb) were investigated. The effects of adding different volumes of H2O2 and Na2S2O8 were likewise tested. The results showed that the above two synergistic systems increased the degradation rates of MO and Rhb by 2.5 and 3.5 times, respectively, compared with pure g-C3N4, and that the degradation rates of both MO and Rhb reached 100% within 120 min and 90 min, respectively, in accordance with the primary reaction kinetics. When H2O2 and Na2S2O8 were added dropwise at 10 mL each, the degradation rates of MO and Rhb were 82.22% and 99.81%, respectively, after 30 min of open light. The results of experiments upon both zeta potential and radical quenching showed that ·OH and ·O2 were the main active radicals for dye degradation in our synergistic system. In addition, stability tests showed that the photocatalysts in the synergistic system still had good reusability. Therefore, the use of a synergistic system can effectively reduce the photogenerated electron-hole pair complexation rate, representing a significant improvement in both photocatalytic degradation and for stability levels. 1. conclusions Compared with the pure g-C3N4, the degradation rates of MO and Rhb were increased by 2.5 and 3.5 times for the above two synergistic systems, respectively. Within 60 min of photocatalytic reaction, the degradation rates of MO and Rhb were 90.71% and 98.54% in the H2O2 synergistic system, respectively, and 92.61% and 99.56% in the Na2S2O8 synergistic system, respectively. It can be seen that the addition of an oxidant is beneficial to the effective separation and migration of photogenerated electron-hole pairs. The results of Na2S2O8 and H2O2 concentration on the degradation of pollutants showed that the photocatalytic degradation of the synergistic system showed a tendency to become better with the increase in the drop volume. Zeta potential and radical quenching experiments showed that ·OH and ·O2− were the main reactive radicals for the degradation of dyes in these synergistic systems.