The fresh leaves of Mitragyna speciosa (Korth.) Havil. have been traditionally consumed for centuries in Southeast Asia for its healing properties. Although the alkaloids of M. speciosa have been studied since the 1920s, comparative and systematic studies of metabolite composition based on different leaf maturity levels are still lacking. This study assessed the secondary metabolite composition in two different leaf stages (young and mature) of M. speciosa, using an untargeted liquid chromatography-electrospray ionisation-time-of-flightmass spectrometry (LC-ESI-TOF-MS) metabolite profiling. The results revealed 86 putatively annotated metabolite features (RT:m/z value) comprising 63 alkaloids, 10 flavonoids, 6 terpenoids, 3 phenylpropanoids, and 1 of each carboxylic acid, glucoside, phenol, and phenolic aldehyde. The alkaloid features were further categorised into 14 subclasses, i.e., the most abundant class of secondary metabolites identified. As per previous reports, indole alkaloids are the most abundant alkaloid subclass in M. speciosa. The result of multivariate analysis (MVA) using principal component analysis (PCA) showed a clear separation of 92.8% between the young and mature leaf samples, indicating a high variance in metabolite levels between them. Akuammidine, alstonine, tryptamine, and yohimbine were tentatively identified among the many new alkaloids reported in this study, depicting the diverse biological activities of M. speciosa. Besides delving into the knowledge of metabolite distribution in different leaf stages, these findings have extended the current alkaloid repository of M. speciosa for a better understanding of its pharmaceutical potential. Introduction The Mitragyna genus from the Rubiaceae family encompasses 10 species, of which six are Asian and four are African. The most prevalent species in the Malay Peninsula are Mitragyna speciosa, Mitragyna diversifolia, Mitragyna hirsuta, Mitragyna parvifolia, Mitragyna rotundifolia, and Mitragyna tubulosa, which are known to contain indole alkaloids with PLOS ONE PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283147 March 21, 2023 1 / 24 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 conclusions This study reports a comprehensive metabolome from young and mature leaves of M. speciosa via LC-ESI-TOF-MS. In total, 86 metabolites were annotated as alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenoids, phenylpropanoids, carboxylic acid, glucoside, phenol, and phenolic aldehyde. Diverse alkaloid profiles were also identified and classified into 14 subclasses, with 13 subclasses of alkaloids that have not been reported in M. speciosa. These alkaloids are potentially associated with the physiological and biochemical progressions during leaf maturity and plant defence against herbivores, insects, and pathogens. Our findings support M. speciosa as a prominent source of biologically active alkaloids, which can be potentially used for myriads of therapeutic uses, including managing depression, cancer, and diabetes. Interestingly, this study also found that young leaves contain more significantly abundant and medicinally beneficial alkaloids, all of which have prominent bioactivities. 