The oxidative stability of extra virgin olive oil (EVOO) depends on its composition, primarily, phenolic compounds and tocopherols, which are strong antioxidants, but also carotenoids, squalene, and fatty acids contribute. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of malaxation conditions and olive storage on the composition of ‘Corbella’ EVOO produced in an industrial mill to determine which parameters and compounds could give more stable oils. Although a longer malaxation time at a higher temperature and olive storage had a negative effect on the content of α-tocopherol, squalene, flavonoids, lignans, phenolic acids, and phenolic alcohols, the antioxidant capacity and oxidative stability of the oil were improved because of an increase in the concentration of oleacein (56–71%) and oleocanthal (42–67%). Therefore, these two secoiridoids could be crucial for better stability and a longer shelf life of EVOOs, and their enhancement should be promoted. A synergistic effect between secoiridoids and carotenoids could also contribute to EVOO stability. Additionally, ‘Corbella’ cultivar seems to be a promising candidate for the production of EVOOs with a high oleic/linoleic ratio. These findings signify a notable advancement and hold substantial utility and significance in addressing and enhancing EVOO stability. 1. conclusions This study of ‘Corbella’ EVOO, which was aimed at improving its oxidative stability, revealed two significant conclusions. First, linoleic acid was favored by olive storage and a higher malaxation temperature. Consequently, the oleic/linoleic ratio was higher at the lower malaxation temperature and time (18 ◦C and 30 min), and when the oil was produced on the same day of olive harvest. Accordingly, the ‘Corbella’ cultivar seems to be a promising candidate for the production of EVOOs with a high oleic/linoleic ratio. Second, although producing the EVOOs on the day of the olive harvest with malaxation at 18 ◦C for 30 min resulted in a better composition in terms of α-tocopherol, squalene, and oleic/linoleic ratio, these conditions did not produce the best values of antioxidant activity and oxidative stability. In fact, the EVOOs with the optimum antioxidant capacity and oxidative stability were obtained by malaxating at the higher temperature and times, and after storing the olives overnight. These desirable attributes were positively correlated with the content of secoiridoids, especially oleacein and oleocanthal. A synergistic effect between these two secoiridoids and carotenoids should not be discarded. The results of this study therefore indicate that secoiridoids contribute strongly to the antioxidant capacity and oxidative stability of ‘Corbella’ EVOOs, and that oils with a high content of oleacein and oleocanthal will be more stable and have a longer shelf life. According to this study, storing the olives at environmental temperature overnight and performing the malaxation at least at 23 ◦C for 40–50 min (depending on the temperature), will increase the oleacein and oleocanthal content and thus the oxidative stability of EVOOs. These findings signify a notable advancement and hold substantial utility and significance in addressing and enhancing EVOO stability.