Aerogels are a class of lightweight, nanoporous, and nanostructured materials with diverse chemical compositions and a huge potential for applications in a broad spectrum of fields. This has led the IUPAC to include them in the top ten emerging technologies in chemistry for 2022. This review provides an overview of aerogel-based adsorbents that have been used for the removal and recovery of uranium from aqueous environments, as well as an insight into the physicochemical parameters affecting the adsorption efficiency and mechanism. Uranium removal is of particular interest regarding uranium analysis and recovery, to cover the present and future uranium needs for nuclear power energy production. Among the methods used, such as ion exchange, precipitation, and solvent extraction, adsorption-based technologies are very attractive due to their easy and low-cost implementation, as well as the wide spectrum of adsorbents available. Aerogel-based adsorbents present an extraordinary sorption capacity for hexavalent uranium that can be as high as 8.8 mol kg–1 (2088 g kg–1). The adsorption data generally follow the Langmuir isotherm model, and the kinetic data are in most cases better described by the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. An evaluation of the thermodynamic data reveals that the adsorption is generally an endothermic, entropy-driven process (∆H0, ∆S0 > 0). Spectroscopic studies (e.g., FTIR and XPS) indicate that the adsorption is based on the formation of inner-sphere complexes between surface active moieties and the uranyl cation. Regeneration and uranium recovery by acidification and complexation using carbonate or chelating ligands (e.g., EDTA) have been found to be successful. The application of aerogel-based adsorbents to uranium removal from industrial processes and uranium-contaminated waste waters was also successful, assuming that these materials could be very attractive as adsorbents in water treatment and uranium recovery technologies. However, the selectivity of the studied materials towards hexavalent uranium is limited, suggesting further developments of aerogel materials that could be modified by surface derivatization with chelating agents (e.g., salophen and iminodiacetate) presenting high selectivity for uranyl moieties. 1. 3. conclusions and future studies Over the last decade, the number of studies concerning uranium sorption using aerogels has dramatically increased. This is because of the steadily increasing interest in the production of efficient adsorbent materials for radionuclide removal and recovery from contaminated waters. Thus, captured uranium is planned to cover the future demands of the nuclear power industry. Generally, studies are focused on the effect of different physicochemical parameters (e.g., pH, initial U(VI) concentration, ionic strength, temperature, and contact time) on the adsorption efficiency. According to those studies, the pH plays a key role because it governs both the U(VI) speciation and surface species dissociation and charge. Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 363 14 of 20 The isothermal data obtained from experiments related to the effect of metal ion concentration are best fitted by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm model, resulting in supreme sorption capacity values (in some cases even above 2000 g of uranium per kg of aerogel) that are the highest ever reported for uranium. The experimental kinetic data indicate fast sorption kinetics (equilibrium is reached in a few minutes to a few hours), and in most cases they are best fitted by the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. Both the Langmuir isotherm and the pseudo-second-order kinetic models are indicative of chemisorption. Other parameters/phenomena, however, such as the diffusion within the porous matrix of aerogels, the adsorbent dose, or the effect of the ionic strength, cannot be ignored. In addition, the associated thermodynamic data generally reveal an endothermic, entropy-driven sorption mechanism, indicating the formation of inner-sphere surface complexes. The formation of inner-sphere complexes between U(VI) and the active groups on the aerogel surfaces is supported mainly by FTIR and XPS data. Several aerogel materials show an excellent performance regarding their reuse, even after several adsorption-desorption cycles, with a relatively high uranium recovery. However, the presence of multivalent metal cations (e.g., Ca2+ or Al3+) and complexing species (e.g., CO32− or PO43−) strongly affects the sorption efficiency of the adsorbents toward uranium, because of competitive sorption and the formation of stable solution complexes, respectively, indicating a limited selectivity of the studied aerogels toward uranium (U(VI).