This study explores the electrochemical reduction in CO2 using room temperature ionic liquids as solvents or electrolytes, which can minimize the environmental impact of CO2 emissions. To design effective CO2 electrochemical systems, it is crucial to identify intermediate surface species and reaction products in situ. The study investigates the electrochemical reduction in CO2 using a cobalt porphyrin molecular immobilized electrode in 1-n-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMI.BF4) room temperature ionic liquids, through in-situ surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) and electrochemical technique. The results show that the highest faradaic efficiency of CO produced from the electrochemical reduction in CO2 can reach 98%. With the potential getting more negative, the faradaic efficiency of CO decreases while H2 is produced as a competitive product. Besides, water protonates porphyrin macrocycle, producing pholorin as the key intermediate for the hydrogen evolution reaction, leading to the out-of-plane mode of the porphyrin molecule. Absorption of CO2 by the ionic liquids leads to the formation of BMI·CO2 adduct in BMI·BF4 solution, causing vibration modes at 1100, 1457, and 1509 cm−1. However, the key intermediate of CO− 2 · radical is not observed. The υ(CO) stretching mode of absorbed CO is affected by the electrochemical Stark effect, typical of CO chemisorbed on a top site. 1. conclusions In conclusion, this study investigated the molecular mechanism of cobalt porphyrin catalyzed CO2 electrochemical reduction using in-situ SERS. The results showed that cobalt porphyrin adsorbs successfully on the surface of the Ag electrode, exhibiting marker vibration modes of υ(C–N) and υ(C–C) at 1351, 1399 cm−1 and 1532, 1558 cm−1 for CoIII and CoII, respectively. Water served as a proton source, and the vibration modes assigned for the out-of-plane mode of protonated porphyrin molecule indicated that the key intermediate for competing HER and CO2 electrochemical reduction is pholorin. The use of ionic liquids helps to activate CO2 through the formation of the BMI·CO2 adduct, which leads to the formation of [PP–Co–COOH]− intermediate for the final product. These findings provide insights into the molecular-level understanding of CO2 electrochemical reduction and can aid in the design of more efficient and environmentally sustainable CO2 conversion systems. However, the molecular structure of the cation in ionic liquids plays a critical role in determining the electrochemical reduction in CO2 reaction. The properties of the cation, such as ion size, shape, charge and functional groups can significantly influence the reaction mechanism, kinetics, and selectivity. Molecules 2023, 28, 2747 11 of 13