conclusions The GlyKAn AZ app improves manual analyst workflows by automating the input, analysis, and output process of characterization for N-linked glycans. It bypasses the manual steps of characterization and presents the data in auto-generated figures, tables, and relevant statistics that are easily interpretable by an MS analyst, facilitating decisions based on the provided outputs. The app itself is MATLAB based and has a user-friendly interface. Multiple tabs represent different functionalities, including MS1 peak identification, MS2 peak confirmation, MALDI peak identification, and fragment generation, allowing users to add new glycans to the databases by simply providing the structure. In the example MS/MS data set evaluation, all 20 manually identified glycans were successfully identified by the app as matches. The selections were confirmed by inspecting the annotated figures and relevant statistics generated by the MS2 Peak Confirmation tab. For the example MALDI data set, all 49 confirmed glycans were selected by the app, in addition to one peak that was previously unassigned during manual analysis. These results show that the app is accurate across MS/ MS and MALDI functionalities. This app saves analysts’ time and reduces the bottleneck of manually analyzing MS data. By designing around the end user, the GlyKAn AZ app has all the capabilities required by a glycan expert to perform rapid and reproducible glycan analysis, identifying RTs and isomers and ultimately generating figures that can support glycan identification for both development and regulatory applications. Abbreviations 2-AB 2-Aminobenzamide CID Collision-induced dissociation Da Daltons DHB 2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid DMSO Dimethylsulfoxide HILIC Hydrophilic interaction chromatography LC Liquid chromatography ppm Parts per million ProCA Procainamide MALDI–TOF Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization–time of flight MS Mass spectrometry MS/MS Tandem mass spectrometry m/z Mass-to-charge ratio PNGase Peptide-N-glycosidase A RT Retention time Tris Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane UPLC Ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography 