Purpose: Acute central serous chorioretinopathy (ACSCR) is a condition characterized by decreased visual acuity, macular thickening, and edema under the retinal layer. Although the underlying mechanisms of the disease are not fully understood, oxidative stress is considered to be a critical risk factor. The aim of this study was to shed light on the pathophysiology of ACSCR by investigating the levels of circulating trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), phoenixin (PNX), alarin (ALA), and spexin (SPX) molecules in ACSCR patients. Methods: The study included 30 ACSCR patients and 30 healthy individuals as controls. ACSCR was diagnosed using optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging. Five mL blood samples were collected from all participants following overnight fasting. The levels of TMAO, PNX, ALA, and SPX in the blood samples were measured using the ELISA method. Results: Visual acuity was found to be significantly reduced in ACSCR patients compared to the control group (<0.05), while macular thickness was increased (<0.05). Furthermore, TMAO, PNX, and ALA levels were significantly higher in ACSCR patients (<0.05), while SPX levels were significantly lower compared to the control group (<0.05). In ACSCR patients, there was a positive correlation between macular thickness and TMAO, PNX, and ALA; there was, however, a negative correlation with SPX. Additionally, visual acuity was negatively correlated with TMAO, PNX, and ALA, while SPX levels decreased as visual acuity decreased. Conclusions: These results demonstrate a correlation between the TMAO, PNX, ALA, and SPX levels of ACSCR patients and their visual acuity and macular thickness. Given the role of these molecules in ACSCR’s pathophysiology, they hold promise as potential diagnostic, therapeutic, and follow-up markers in 1. conclusions TMAO, PNX, ALA, and SPX changes are thought to potentially play a role in the pathophysiology of ACSCR. Therefore, in the future, reducing the levels of TMAO, PNX, and ALA and administering SPX may be potential therapeutic strategies for controlling this disease.