Lutein and its cis-isomers occur in a lot of plants, including a variety of flowers. In this study, lutein isomers were produced via iodine-catalyzed isomerization, and four cis-isomers (9Z-, 9′Z-, 13Z-, and 13Z′) were isolated by means of column chromatography and semipreparative HPLC. The structures of the 9′Zand 13′Z-isomers were elucidated via NMR measurements. These compounds were used as standards for the HPLC-DAD-MS determination of the carotenoid composition of the flowers of 20 plant species, in which lutein and its geometrical isomers are the main components. The flowers showed great variation in their cisand trans-lutein content, and also in the presence or absence of other carotenoids, such as violaxanthin, neoxanthin, β-cryptoxanthin, and β-carotene. Some of the investigated flowers were found to be rich sources of lutein without zeaxanthin. In conclusion, lutein and its mono-cis isomers were found to be the main carotenoids in the studied flowers. The (9Z)-, (9′Z)- and (13Z)-, (13′Z) isomers of lutein accumulated in approximately equal proportions in all but two of the examined flowers. The Anthemis tinctoria and Helichrysum italicum contained ca. 30% of (9′Z)-lutein, which was probably produced enzymatically. With the exception of the above two flowers and the Rorippa Molecules 2023, 28, 1187 12 of 16 austriaca, the proportion of (9Z)-lutein was higher compared to (9′Z)-lutein. In four of the examined flowers, we could not detect zeaxanthin; thus, these plants could be sources of zeaxanthin-free lutein. It was also established that flowers belonging to different families may have similar carotenoid composition, and probably, that members of the same family can have different carotenoid composition. Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at https: //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/molecules28031187/s1, Figure S1: Structure of carotenoids; Figure S2: NMR spectra of lutein isomers in CDCl3 (500/125 MHz for 1H/13C); Figure S3: UV-vis spectra of lutein isomers in the HPLC mobile phase; Figure S4: HPLC-DAD-MS chromatograms. Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.D. ; methodology, J.D. ; formal analysis, G.G.-F. and V.N. ; investigation, V.L.B., V.S. and E.T. ; resources, D.P., V.L.B. and R.F. ; data curation, J.D. ; writing—original draft preparation, J.D., V.N. and D.P. ; writing—review and editing, J.D., V.N. and A.A.; supervision, J.D. ; funding acquisition, J.D. and A.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research was funded by the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund (grants: NKFI K 128253 and 131493). Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in Appendix A of this article and in the Supplementary Materials. Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank INEXA C.A., Ecuador, for the generous donation of the marigold extract. The authors are grateful to Erika Jámbor, Krisztina Sajti, Judit Rigó, Roland Lukács, Zsuzsanna Götz, and Tünde Svoboda for their skillful assistance. The research was performed in collaboration with the Mass Spectrometry Core Facility at the Szentágothai Research Centre of the University of Pécs. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results. Sample Availability: Samples of the compounds are available from the authors. appendix a The plant species used belong to the following eight families: Acanthaceae family Pachystachys lutea Nee: Golden shrimp plant is a subtropical shrub 90–120 cm tall. This species is native to South America. It was collected for the first time in the Amazon region in Brazil [41]. It is commonly used as an ornamental plant [42]. Aizoaceaefamily Glottiphyllum cruciatum (Haw.) N.E.Br, Ice plant has succulent fleshy leaves that are broadened at the base, born in pairs, and spread horizontally. The flowers are yellow. This species is native to arid areas in South Africa [43]. Amaryllidaceaefamily Sternbergia lutea (L.) Ker Gawl. ex Spreng, Autumn daffodil is a bulbous plant native to Iran and Turkey. A flower with six bright yellow sepals appears from September to January, depending on the occurrence of rainfall and the temperature of the area [44]. The bulb of this plant contains Amaryllidiaceae alkaloids; thus, it can be potentially used as a medicinal plant [45]. Asteraceaefamily Anthemis tinctoria L., Golden marguerite is a herbaceous perennial that blooms from May to September. Its daisy-like head inflorescence (capitulum) consists of ray and disk flowers, which are of a bright yellow color. The species of the Anthemis genus Molecules 2023, 28, 1187 13 of 16 are widely used in pharmaceutics, cosmetics, and the food industry. The flowers have well-documented use as antiseptic and healing herbs, with the main components being natural flavonoids and essential oils [46]. Coreopsis pubescens Elliott, Star tickseed is a perennial herbaceous plant that grows up to 120 cm tall. The flower heads are yellow, with both ray florets and disk florets. This plant is native to N. America, where it grows in rocky open woods and gravely stream beds [47]. Coreopsis verticillata L., Whorled tickseed is a perennial herbaceous plant that grows up to 100 cm tall. Both the ray florets and disk florets are bright yellow. It is native to North America, where it has been traditionally used as diuretic, while its flowers are edible [48]. Echinacea paradoxa (J.B.S. Norton) Britt. The yellow coneflower is a perennial herb and ornamental plant that grows up to 90 cm tall. One plant can form one or more bright yellow flower heads, each with yellow ray florets and yellow disk florets, while all the other Echinacea species native to North America are purple to pink [49–51]. It was used by Native Americans as a herb for various ailments, including mouth sores, colds, and cough [52]. Helianthus angustifolius L., Narrowleaf sunflower is a perennial herbaceous plant with a 50–150 cm high erect stem and narrowly lanceolate to linear leaves. The capitulum consists of yellow ray florets and disk florets with yellow corolla lobes. The anthers are dark brown or black, and the appendages are dark (style branches are usually yellow). It is native to the south-central and eastern United States, found in all the coastal states from Texas to Long Island [53], and widely used as ornamental plant. Helianthus tuberosus L., Jerusalem artichoke is a perennial herbaceous plant with 150–300 cm high erect stem and lanceolate leaves. The capitulum inflorescence consists of yellow ray florets and disk florets with yellow corolla lobes. It is native to N. America and naturalized in Europe, and it is widely known to have inulin-rich tubers; therefore, it is often used as a crop [54], and sometimes, as an ornamental plant. Recent research has confirmed that it is not only an alternative plant protein source but also a good source of biological valuable phytochemicals [55]. The flowers are consumed as edible parts [56]. Helichrysum italicum (Roth) G. Don, Immortelle is a perennial xerophytic plant native to the dry, stony, and sandy areas of the Mediterranean region. This herb has been used in folk medicine due to its bile-promoting, diuretic, and expectorant effects. Studies have shown the antioxidant, antibacterial, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and anti-proliferative effects of its extracts and essential oil [57]. Brassicaceae family Alyssum murale Waldst. & Kit. : Yellowtuft is a herbaceous perennial plant that blooms from May to July, with four small yellow petals. It is native to southern Europe, grows on serpentine soils, and accumulates Ni; therefore, it has been used as a crop for phytoremediation [58]. Bunias orientalis L.: A Turkish wartycabbage is a biennial or perennial plant with branched shoots up to 120 cm high. It blooms from May to August. The petals are 4–8 mm long, yellow, entire, or truncate [59]. It is native to the highlands of Armenia, has been introduced to most parts of Europe [60], and is invasive in North America. The high antimicrobial activity of alcoholic extracts of B. orientalis roots against some microbial strains of microorganisms has been shown [61]. Erysimum cheiri (L.) Crantz: Wallflower is an evergreen perennial growing to 0.5 m that is native to S. Europe. The flowers have purplish-green sepals and rounded petals that are 2–3 cm long and bright yellow to red and purple [58]. The plant was formerly used mainly as a diuretic and emmenagogue, but recent research has shown that it is more valuable as a cardiotonic. The flowers and stems are antirheumatic, antispasmodic, cardiotonic, nervine, purgative, and resolvent [62]. Rorippa austriaca (Crantz) Besser: Austrian yellowcress is a 30–100 cm tall perennial plant with simple elongated leaves and 3–4.5 mm long yellow petals. It blooms from June to August [59]. This species is native to Central South-Eastern Europe, and it has recently been expanding its range to North West Europe and become invasive along riverine areas in its new range. Molecules 2023, 28, 1187 14 of 16 Colchicaceaefamily Colchicum autumnale L.: Autumn crocus is a herbaceous perennial. It has leaves up to 25 cm long. The flowers emerge from the ground long after the leaves have dried. The flowers are solitary, 4–7 cm across, with six pink tepals and six stamens, with orange anthers and three white styles. At the time of fertilization, the ovary is deep below ground. The plant grows widely throughout the northern hemisphere. Colchicum extracts were originally used to treat rheumatic complaints, especially gouty attacks [63]. Euphorbiaceae family Euphorbia palustris L.: Marsh spurge is an upright, clump-forming, herbaceous peren- nial plant that grows up to 150 cm. It occurs on wetlands, and in autumn, the foliage turns orange-red [64]. Euphorbia lucida Waldst. et Kit. : The shining spurge is a perennial plant with a thick stem that reaches a height of 130 cm. The dark-green, lanceolate leaves with entire margins are leathery and shiny [65]. It is native to Central Europe, Eastern Central Europe, the Balkan Peninsula, and West Siberia. Euphorbia epithymoides L. (E. polychroma A. Kern. ): The cushion spurge is a hairy perennial plant that grows up to 50 cm high. It bears terminal cymes of yellow flower heads (cyathia) in spring and summer, which turn orange-red in autumn. It grows on the edge of dry calcareous forests and in steppe meadows [64], and it is native to Central and Southern Europe and the Middle East. Fabaceae family Cassia artemisioides (Gaudich. ex DC.) Randell. : Wormwood senna is an evergreen shrub that grows up to 300 cm. The plant is endemic to Australia and cultivated as an ornamental plant in various countries. It blooms during winter and produces plenty of yellow flowers. Senna roots are used in Ayurvedic medicine for the treatment of skin diseases, leprosy, tuberculous glands, and syphilis, while its fruits are used for the treatment of inflammation, throat troubles, liver complaints, chest complaints, rheumatism, and asthma [65]. Nymphaceae family Nuphar lutea (L.) Smith: Water lily is a macrophyte with large leaves and yellow flowers floating on lakes or small rivers. The plant has a thick rhizome, which is anchored in the sediment by roots at depths up to about 250 cm [66].