Oximes and hydroxylamines are a very important class of skeletons that not only widely exist in natural products and drug molecules, but also a class of synthon, which have been widely used in industrial production. Due to weak N-O σ bonds of oximes and hydroxylamines, they can be easily transformed into other functional groups by N-O bond cleavage. Therefore, the synthesis of N-heterocycle by using oximes and hydroxylamines as nitrogen sources has attracted wide attention. Recent advances for the synthesis of N-heterocycle through transition-metal-catalyzed and radicalmediated cyclization classified by the type of nitrogen sources and rings are summarized. In this paper, the recent advances in the N-O bond cleavage of oximes and hydroxylamines are reviewed. We hope that this review provides a new perspective on this field, and also provides a reference to develop environmentally friendly and sustainable methods. 1. conclusions and outlook With the development in the field of transition metal catalysis and radical chemistry, the synthesis of N-heterocycles by using oxime and hydroxylamines has become one of the most powerful tools in organic synthesis. In the past few years, the strategy of nitrogen-oxygen bond cleavage of oxime and hydroxylamines has been widely used for the synthesis of various structurally diverse N-heterocycles. Using oximes and hydroxylamines through N-O bond cleavage have also been well-established for efficient access to the Nheterocycles, such as aziridines, β-lactam, 1H-indazoles, oxazoles, pyrrolines, pyrroles, pyridines, and other cyclic compounds. In the past few years, the synthesis of N-heterocycle by using oximes and hydroxylamines as nitrogen sources are summarized and discussed according to different nitrogen sources and heterocyclic types. Recently, the construction of heterocyccles by using the oxidation characteristics of oxime esters is more efficient and sustainable. Most of these reactions are usually conducted under cheap transition metal catalyst and oxygen, allowing the construction of N-heterocycles with good functional group tolerance and more diverse transformation. It is worth noting that the radical strategy shows more powerful prospects than the conventional transition metal catalytic strategy [9,66], allowing the development dual catalysis systems, such as synergistic copper and photoredox catalysis and synergistic nickel and photoredox catalysis [67–70]. In particular, the iminyl radicals as unstable nitrogen radicals can be transformed more often to synthesize complex and diverse N-heterocycles [71–73]. We hope that this review provides a new perspective on this field, and also provides a reference to develop environmentally friendly and sustainable methods.