Most coarse-grained models of individual capsomers associated with viruses employ rigid building blocks that do not exhibit shape adaptation during self-assembly. We develop a coarsegrained general model of viral capsomers that incorporates their stretching and bending energies while retaining many features of the rigid-body models, including an overall trapezoidal shape with attractive interaction sites embedded in the lateral walls to favor icosahedral capsid assembly. Molecular dynamics simulations of deformable capsomers reproduce the rich self-assembly behavior associated with a general T = 1 icosahedral virus system in the absence of a genome. Transitions from non-assembled configurations to icosahedral capsids to kinetically-trapped malformed structures are observed as the steric attraction between capsomers is increased. An assembly diagram in the space of capsomer窶田apsomer steric attraction and capsomer deformability reveals that assembling capsomers of higher deformability into capsids requires increasingly large steric attraction between capsomers. Increasing capsomer deformability can reverse incorrect capsomer窶田apsomer binding, facilitating transitions from malformed structures to symmetric capsids; however, making capsomers too soft inhibits assembly and yields fluid-like structures. 1. conclusions We have developed a coarse-grained general model of viral capsomers that incorporates their stretching and bending energies. MD simulations of identical deformable capsomers in an NVT ensemble at 298 K show that the combination of orientation-dependent capsomer窶田apsomer steric interactions and capsomer deformability can yield capsid structures with T = 1 icosahedral symmetry as low-energy configurations. For a wide range of elastic moduli, transitions from non-assembled configurations to icosahedral capsids to kinetically-trapped malformed structures are observed as the steric attraction between capsomers is increased. Assembling capsomers of higher deformability into capsids requires increasingly large steric attraction between capsomers. In general, we expect the solution conditions yielding ordered capsids to be different for deformable capsomers compared to the rigid ones. The demonstration of deformable nanostructures self-assembling into ordered materials with appropriate adjustment of solution conditions has broad implications in using deformability as a control knob to change the self-assembly of soft materials. Capsomer deformability has a pronounced effect on viral self-assembly. Deformability enables capsid assembly where there was none observed for rigid capsomers by enhancing the average angle and edge length fluctuations which reverse incorrect capsomer窶田apsomer binding and facilitate transitions from malformed structures to symmetric capsids. The lowering of elastic moduli can be considered as promoting optimal transient bond formation, i.e., a similar frequency of bond-breaking and bond-forming events, which has been linked to the effective self-assembly of ordered capsids [15]. However, making capsomers too soft produces large structural fluctuations which greatly enhance the probability of bond-breaking events, limiting the potential of capsid nucleation. In this work, we tuned the deformability by changing both bending and stretching moduli. 