This paper presents the integration of active disturbance rejection control (ADRC) with soft sensors for enhancing the composition control performance in a distillation column. Static and dynamic soft sensors are developed to estimate the top and bottom product compositions using multiple tray temperatures. In order to cope with the collinearity issues in tray temperature measurements, static and dynamic principal component regression is used in developing the soft sensors. The soft sensor outputs are introduced as the feedback signals to ADRC. This control scheme is termed as “inferential ADRC control”. Static control offsets are eliminated through mean updating in the soft-sensor models. The effectiveness of the proposed control scheme is demonstrated on a benchmark simulated methanol-water distillation column. 1. conclusions Inferential ADRC control schemes with static and dynamic PCR models are proposed for product composition control in distillation columns. Inferential estimation models for product compositions are developed from process operational data using PCR. The estimated product compositions are used as the controlled variables in the ADRC controller. Mean updating technique is used to eliminate the steady state model estimation bias and the resulting control off-sets. The proposed control method is applied to a simulated methanol–water separation column. Simulation results indicate the effectiveness and success of the proposed dynamic inferential ADRC control method over the static inferential ADRC control method. Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.A.K. and J.Z. ; methodology, F.A.K. and J.Z. ; software, F.A.K. and J.Z. ; validation, F.A.K. ; formal analysis, F.A.K. ; investigation, F.A.K. ; resources, J.Z. ; data curation, F.A.K. and J.Z. ; writing—original draft preparation, F.A.K. ; writing—review and editing, J.Z. ; visualization, F.A.K. ; supervision, J.Z. ; project administration, J.Z. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Figure 14. Responses of actual and estimated product compositions under inferential ADRC with 5th order dynamic PCR models (with mean updating). Table 4. SSE of different control sche es. Control Schemes Comp. Botto p. Inferential ADRC with static PCR model Without mean ting ,542 6 With mean updating 1.6889 1.8309 Inferential ADRC with 5th order dynamic PCR model Without mean updating 165.52 219.59 With mean updating 0.1856 0.1551 It can be seen from Figures 13 and 14 that the resulting control off-sets and steady state model estimation bias have been eliminated successfully through the mean updating technique. Moreover, it can be noticed from Table 4 that the dynamic PCR model has Sensors 2023, 23, 1019 15 of 17 much smaller estimation off-sets than the static PCR model when the operating condition changed. This leads to a result that the dynamic PCR model is more robust than the static PCR model to process operating condition variations. As a result, the dynamic inferential ADRC scheme gives better control performance than the static inferential ADRC. 7. conclusions Inferential ADRC control schemes with static and dynamic PCR models are proposed for product composition control in distillation columns. Inferential estimation models for product compositions are developed from process operational data using PCR. The estimated product compositions are used as the controlled variables in the ADRC controller. Mean updating technique is used to eliminate the steady state model estimation bias and the resulting control off-sets. The proposed control method is applied to a simulated methanol– water separation column. Simulation results indicate the effectiveness and success of the proposed dynamic inferential ADRC control method over the static inferential ADRC control method 