The study aimed to synthesize non-noxious, clean, reliable, and green sulfur nanoparticles (SNPs) from Citrus limon leaves. The synthesized SNPs were used to analyze particle size, zeta potential, UV–visible spectroscopy, SEM, and ATR-FTIR. The prepared SNPs exhibited a globule size of 55.32 ± 2.15 nm, PDI value of 0.365 ± 0.06, and zeta potential of −12.32 ± 0.23 mV. The presence of SNPs was confirmed by UV–visible spectroscopy in the range of 290 nm. The SEM image showed that the particles were spherical with a size of 40 nm. The ATR-FTIR study showed no interaction, and all the major peaks were preserved in the formulations. An antimicrobial and antifungal study of SNPs was carried out against Gram-positive bacteria (Staph. aureus, Bacillus), Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli and Bordetella), and fungal strains (Candida albicans). The study showed that Citrus limon extract SNPs exhibited better antimicrobial and antifungal activities against Staph. aureus, Bacillus, E. coli, Bordetella, and Candida albicans at a minimal inhibitory concentration of 50 μg/mL. Different antibiotics were used alone and in combination with SNPs of Citrus limon extract to evaluate their activity against various strains of bacteria and fungal strains. The study showed that using SNPs of Citrus limon extract with antibiotics has a synergistic effect against Staph.aureus, Bacillus, E. coli, Bordetella, and Candida albicans. SNPs were embedded in nanohydrogel formulations for in vivo (wound healing) studies. In preclinical studies, SNPs of Citrus limon extract embedded within a nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4) have shown promising results. To be widely used in clinical settings, further studies are needed to evaluate their safety and efficacy in human volunteers. 1. conclusions Using sulfur nanoparticles of Citrus limon showed promising results in inhibiting the growth of Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus, E. coli, Bordetella, and Candida albicans. Using Citrus limon as a source of sulfur nanoparticles is advantageous, as it is easily accessible and possesses various bioactive compounds with potential therapeutic effects. Furthermore, using sulfur nanoparticles of Citrus limon embedded in a nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4) showed potential in promoting wound healing activity in rats. NHGF4 exhibited significant wound closure indicating its effectiveness in accelerating the healing process. The nanohydrogel matrix also provided a suitable cell proliferation and tissue regeneration environment. Therefore, the study concluded that the sulfur nanoparticles of Citrus limon embedded in a nanohydrogel formulation could be a promising candidate for wound healing applications. 4. materials and methods  4.1. materials Sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate (Na2S2O3·5H2O) and HCl were purchased from Merck Darmstadt, Germany. Distilled water was obtained through the Milli-Q water purification system of the Gomal Centre of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Gomal University, Dera Ismail Khan, KP, Pakistan. Carbopol and triethanolamine were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, CA, USA. Nutrient agar and nutrient broth were procured from Oxide, UK. Leaves of Citrus limon were collected from the Botanical Garden, Faculty of Agriculture, Gomal University, Dera Ismail Khan, Pakistan. Erythromycin thiocyanate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, CA, USA. Amphotericin B and neomycin sulfate were purchased from Dow chemical company, Wiesbaden, Germany. Strains of Escherichia coli (ATCC 25922), Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 6538), Bacillus subtilis (ATCC Gels 2023, 9, 284 11 of 16 6633), Bordetella (ATCC4617), and Candida albicans (ATCC 10231) were taken from Bio-labs, Islamabad, Pakistan. 4.2. plant extract formation After collecting Citrus limon leaves, they were rinsed under running tap water to remove dirt. To remove any surface moisture from the leaves, they were dried at room temperature after washing. In a mechanical blender, the leaves were chopped after drying. A mixture of 10 g of chopped leaves in 100 mL of distilled water was prepared. At 90 ◦C, the mixture was boiled for 20 min in a water bath. A Whatman filter paper was used to filter this combination after it had been cooled down to ambient temperature. Centrifugation of the obtained mixture for 10 min at 7000 rpm was done to remove biomaterials with high density. The supernatant was refrigerated and used as a plant extract for later use [39]. 4.3. synthesis of sulfur nanoparticles The method used by K Khairan et al. (2023) for synthesizing sulfur nanoparticles was slightly modified [40]. A total of 10 mL of plant extract was taken, and 5 g of sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate (Na2S2O3·5H2O) was added and stirred with a magnetic stirrer for 20 min. The extract was then agitated while 10 mL of 10% HCl was added dropwise using a dropper. To ensure homogeneous sulfur precipitation, continuous stirring was adopted. For 10 min, the mixture was centrifuged at 5000 rpm. It is essential that the sulfur precipitates are thoroughly cleaned after centrifugation by being washed three times in double-distilled water, with the supernatant discarded following the final washing. Refrigeration was used to dry sulfur nanoparticles after they had been collected. The sulfur nanoparticles were stored at room temperature after drying for further studies. The sulfur nanoparticles of Citrus limon were further characterized for in vitro, antimicrobial, and antifungal activities. Furthermore, these prepared SNPs were embedded into Nanohydrogel formulation for in vivo, and wound healing activities (Figure 11). ·Gels 2023, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 17 Escherichia coli (ATCC 25922), Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 6538), Bacillus subtilis (ATCC 6633), Bordetella (ATCC4617), and Candida albicans (ATCC 10231) were taken from Bio-labs, Islamabad, Pakistan. 4.2. plant extract formation After collecting Citrus limon leaves, they were rinsed under running tap water to remove dirt. To remove any surface moisture from the leaves, they were dried at room temperature after washing. In a mechanical blender, the leaves were chopped after drying. A mixture of 10 g of chopped leaves in 100 mL of distilled water was prepared. At 90 °C, the mixture was boiled for 20 min in a water bath. A Whatman filter paper was used to filter this combination after it had been cooled down to ambient temperature. Centrifugation of the obtained mixture for 10 min at 7000 rpm was done to remove biomaterials with high density. The supernatant was refrigerated and used as a plant extract for later use [39]. 4.3. synthesis of sulfur nanoparticles The method used by K Khairan et al. (2023) for synthesizing sulfur nanoparticles was slightly modified [40]. A total of 10 mL of plant extract was taken, and 5 g of sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate (Na2S2O3·5H2O) was added and stirred with a magnetic stirrer for 20 min. The extract was then agitated while 10 mL of 10% HCl was added dropwise using a dropper. To ensure homogeneous sulfur precipitation, continuous stirring was adopted. For 10 min, the mixture was centrifuged at 5000 rpm. It is essential that the sulfur precipitates are thoroughly cleaned after centrifugation by being washed three times in double-distilled water, with the supernatant discarded following the final washing. Refrigeration was used to dry sulfur nanoparticles after they had been collected. The sulfur nanoparticles were stored at room temperature after drying for further studies. The sulfur nanoparticles of citrus limon were further characterized for in vitro, antimicrobial, and antifungal activities. Furthermore, these prepared SNPs were embedded into Nanohydrogel formulation for in vivo, and wound healing activities (Figure 11). Figure 11. Scheme of the experimental procedure. 4.4. characterization of synthesized sulfur nanoparticles  4.4.1. particle size and zeta potential NPs were characterized using photon correlation spectroscopy (Malvern Zetasizer Nano series Nano-S and Nano-Z, Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK). SNPs were dispersed in deionized water for 5 mL and analyzed on Zetasizer. Zeta potential was measured using special tubes. All experiments were run in triplicate; mean ± SD, n = 3 [41]. Figure 11. Scheme of the experimental procedure. 4.4. characterizati f i l 4.4.1. Particle ize a eta te tial Ps ere charact ri si t c rr l ti s ctr scopy ( alvern Zetasizer Nano series a - - , l er I str ents Ltd., orcestershire, UK). SNPs were disperse in dei i t r f r l t si er. Zeta potential was eas re si s ecial tubes. All experiments were ru in triplicate; mean ± SD, n = 3 [41]. 4.4.2. UV–Visible Spectroscopy To characterize already synthesized sulfur nanoparticles with the scanning range of 200–800 nm, UV–visible spectroscopy (Shimadzu 1601, Kyoto, Japan) was employed. Sulfur nanoparticles were confirmed by this experiment [42]. Gels 2023, 9, 284 12 of 16 4.4.3. ATR-FTIR Analysis ATR-FTIR (L1600300, PerkinElmer, 940 Winter Street Waltham, MA, USA), was used to analyze biomolecules responsible for ions reduction and capping. Sulfur nanoparticles, sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate, and Citrus limon leaf extract was studied using ATR-FTIR. The ATR-FTIR spectra were obtained between 4000–450 cm−1 [43]. 4.4.4. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) The size and shape of the synthesized nanoparticles were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JSM-IT 100). In order to prepare SEM specimens, gold coatings were applied because gold conducts heat and electricity and is a good infrared refractor [42]. 4.5. in vitro studies Antibacterial and Antifungal Analysis The agar well diffusion method was used for antibacterial and antifungal analysis that was developed by Vijayan et al. (2018). The antibacterial and antifungal activity of synthesized sulfur nanoparticles was tested against Gram-positive bacteria (Staph. aureus and Bacillus), Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli and Bordetella), and fungal strains (Candida albicans) [44]. In sterilized Petri dishes, nutrient agar was poured and solidified overnight. Cotton buds were used to spread clinical cultures of Staph. aureus, Bacillus, E. coli, Bordetella, and Candida albicans all over the solidified agar plates. Both SNPs alone and in combination with antibiotics were evaluated for their effectiveness. The strain of Gram-positive bacteria (Staph. aureus and Bacillus) was treated with sulfur nanoparticles (SNPs), erythromycin thiocyanate (ET), and a combination of sulfur nanoparticles (SNPs) with erythromycin thiocyanate (SNPsET). The strain of Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli and Bordetella) were treated with sulfur nanoparticles (SNPs), neomycin sulfate (NS), and a combination of sulfur nanoparticles (SNPs) with neomycin sulfate (SNPsNS). The fungal strain (Candida albicans) was treated with sulfur nanoparticles (SNPs), Amphotericin B (AB), and a combination of sulfur nanoparticles with Amphotericin B (SNPsAB). A sterile cork-borer was used to create three wells of 6 mm in each plate. Distilled water was used to disperse nanoparticles. Sulfur nanoparticles were sonicated for twenty minutes at room temperature after being vortexed for five minutes. Sulfur nanoparticles were concentrated in water at 8 mg/mL. Sterile micropipettes were used to administer samples (sulfur nanoparticles, antibiotics, and antibiotics combined with sulfur nanoparticles) into wells. The antibiotics were treated with 20 L of sulfur nanoparticles. The measurement of inhibition zones around each well followed a 24 h incubation period at 37 ◦C. 4.6. formation of nanohydrogel Five different nanohydrogel formulations were prepared. The optimal formulation for creating hydrogels and incorporating sulfur nanoparticles into gel to create nanohydrogels was ultimately chosen as F4 (Table 3). By scattering 8.5 g of carbopol-934 in 85 mL of distilled water and thoroughly mixing it for 15 min at a speed of 10,000 rpm with a magnetic stirrer, nanohydrogel was formed. After that, 1.5 mL of triethanolamine, a cross-linking agent, was added to the gel. Then, hydrogel was subjected to a 5-min sonication process to eliminate the entrapped air bubbles. The hydrogel was then wrapped in aluminum foil and left in the dark overnight to fully cross-link the polymeric gel with TEA and allow it to swell completely. Nanohydrogel was created by adding 5 g of sulfur nanoparticles and homogenizing them for 3 min with a magnetic stirrer (Table 4) [45]. Gels 2023, 9, 284 13 of 16 Note: F1−F5 (Formulation F1−Formulation F5). Note: NHGF4 (Nanohydrogel Formulation 4). 4.7. characterization of nanohydrogel 4.7.1. pH of Nanohydrogel The pH values of nanohydrogel samples were determined using a digital pH meter (InoLab®, Bremen, Germany) The values were recorded in triplicate; mean ± SD, n = 3 [46]. 4.7.2. Homogeneity Test To evaluate the formulations’ compositions, a homogeneity test was performed for optimized nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4). NHGF4 homogeneity was visually evaluated. Homogeneity was performed to evaluate how the optimized formulation (NHGF4) would feel and seem in usage [47]. 4.7.3. Viscosity of Nanohydrogel An NDV-Series viscometer (Moderner, Shanghai, China) was used to measure the viscosity of optimized nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4). In the viscometer, spindle number 2 rotated at 6, 12, 30, and 60 revolutions per minute. Samples were measured at a temperature of 30 ◦C. The data were collected in triplicate with means ± SD, n = 3 [48]. 4.8. skin irritation test Tests were conducted to determine the effectiveness of an optimized nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4). A NOC for the project was approved by the Gomal Centre of Pharmaceutical Science, Faculty of Pharmacy, Gomal University, Dera Ismail Khan, KP, Pakistan. In this study, healthy albino male rats weighing 250 g were used. Food was provided as per the standard recommendations [49]. During the experiment, rats were kept at room temperature (25 ± 2 ◦C), and humidity was maintained at 50 ± 10%. A total of two groups of rats were used (Group I and Group II). As a control, rats in Group I were treated with the standard irritant formalin, whereas in Group II, rats were treated with prepared nanohydrogel formulations (NHGF4). Skin irritation was scored visually based on the appearance of the skin. There were four categories of skin irritation: “0” means there is no skin irritation, “1” means there is a slight irritation, “2” means there is a well-defined irritation, “3” means there is a moderate irritation, and “4” means there is scarring [49]. 4.9. in vivo studies The in vivo study was approved by the Ethical Review Board, Gomal University, Dera Ismail Khan, KP, Pakistan (protocol code No:332/ERB/GU and 16 November 2022). The in vivo studies were conducted on healthy male rats weighing 250 g. Standard food was given to the rats chosen for the in vivo study. Rats were fed 10% white fish meat, 40% bran, 18% middling, 20% grass meal, and water, as necessary. Rats were kept at room temperature (25 ± 2 ◦C), with 50 ± 10% relative humidity. A total of two groups of rats Gels 2023, 9, 284 14 of 16 (Group I and Group II) were studied. In Group I, rats were left untreated and served as negative controls, while in Group II, rats were treated with nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4) and served as experimental groups. The anesthesia was administered using a ketamine and xylazine injection solution. An electric trimmer was used to shave and clean the backs of the rats after they had been anesthetized. One cage was kept per rat to prevent rats from injuring one another. Biopsy punches were used to create 8 mm-deep wounds in this area. A nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4) was administered to Group II rats instead of Group I rats, which were left untreated. On days 0, 7, and 14, rats’ wounds were evaluated and snapped at the same height and standing position. To measure wound closure, a scale was used. A total of three samples were collected, each in triplicate [49]. 4.10. stability test Phase separation, color change, and odor changes were considered in this test’s execution. The shelf life and color change were assessed through visual examination of the SNPs-embedded nanohydrogel formulation (NHGF4) across various time periods. NHGF4 was diluted with distilled water to check its stability at low and exaggerated temperatures, i.e., 4 ± 2 ◦C and 40 ± 2 ◦C, respectively. Phase separation was assessed by allowing the sample to remain in a water bath at 80 ◦C for 1 h [50]. 4.11. statistical analysis The data were analyzed using Statistical Package Minitab® version 20 (Minitab, LLC, State College, PA, USA) and reported as a Kolmogorov–Smirnov (K–S) test before applying one-way ANOVA. It was statistically analyzed using ANOVA (one-way analysis of variance), with post hoc analysis by Tukey HSD test (IBM® SPSS® Statistics version 19, Armonk, New York, NY, USA). p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data were reported in triplicate (n = 3), and mean ± SD. 