According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that by 2050, drug-resistant infections could cause up to 10 million deaths annually. Therefore, finding a new generation of antibiotics is crucial. Natural compounds from endophytic fungi are considered a potential source of new-generation antibiotics. The antimicrobial and cytotoxic effects of ethyl acetate extracts of nine endophytic fungal isolates obtained from Hyssopus officinalis were investigated for bioassay-guided isolation of the natural compounds. An extract of isolate VII showed the highest antimicrobial activities against Gram-positive bacteria Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus (30.12 ± 0.20 mm and 35.21 ± 0.20 mm) and Gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (30.41 ± 0.23 mm and 25.12 ± 0.25 mm) among the tested extracts of isolates. Molecular identification of isolate VII confirmed it as Chaetomium elatum based on sequencing of its ITS genes, and it was discovered that this was the first time C. elatum had been isolated from H. officinalis. This isolate was cultured at a large scale for the isolation and identification of the active compound. Penicillic acid was isolated for the first time from C. elatum and its chemical structure was established by NMR spectroscopy. The penicillic acid showed strong antibacterial activities against Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus with 20.68 mm and 25.51 mm inhibition zones, respectively. In addition, MIC and MBC values and antibiofilm activities of penicillic acid were determined. It was found that penicillic acid reduced the level of biofilms in proportion to antibacterial activity. 1. conclusions Endophytic fungus C. elatum was isolated for the first time from H. officinalis. EtOAc extract of the C. elatum showed the most effective antimicrobial activities among the extracts of the obtained fungal isolates. It was found that C. elatum extract showed strong antibacterial activity due to mycotoxin penicillic acid. Penicillic acid was first isolated from the fungus C. elatum, and its structure was established by NMR spectroscopy. This result provides further evidence for the synthesis of specific substances by different organisms. However, it raises the question of whether these substances are synthesized uniformly across all organisms.