Given the status and challenges of sUAS platforms for HTPP, the following future considerations are hereby discussed. First, technological improvements in both the operations of sUAS and onboard sensors are essential. The availability of technologies that allow for higher flight stability, longer flight duration (more durable power source), and greater payload capacity is needed for sUAS-based phenotyping over large fields. Additionally, the availability of low-cost and high-performance sensors is critical. The cost of imaging sensors varies with type and complexity; hence, researchers often include sensor protection features (in case of a crash) onboard the sUAS. These additional features may increase payload and limit the number of onboard sensors; hence, sensor fusion (which can improve the accuracy of sUAS phenotyping) on a single flight may be more challenging. Second, a significant proportion of the previous sUAS-based phenotyping studies have evaluated chlorophyll content as an important pigment for diagnosing the state of photosynthesis activity and indicating the general health of the plant. However, no study has been conducted on the application of sUAS-based imagery for the evaluation of carotenoids, which play a significant role in plant photosynthetic processes, stress signals, and adaptation, as well as for crop defense mechanisms. Therefore, sUAS-based studies addressing the potential effects of carotenoids on stress resilience and crop protection may provide additional benefits of HTPP in plant breeding. Third, the complexity of sUAS-based data processing and analysis may limit its use among researchers because no commercially available fully automated data processing or analysis pipelines are known. Therefore, studies with a focus on the development of fully automated pipelines of sUAS-based crop imagery will enhance the impacts and applications of sUAS technology for phenotyping, crop monitoring, and improving crop management practices. Another area of potential consideration is the application of sUAS for HTPP in fruit and vegetable crops. Compared to row or grain crops, a small proportion of the sUAS-based phenotyping studies were conducted on horticultural (fruit and vegetable) crops. Limited application of HTPP in horticultural crops could be due to the unique growing conditions (controlled environment, netting) and/or short production cycles often associated with these crops. Given the high dependencies of these crops on pest and disease control practices, a wider application of sUAS systems may enhance the early detection of diseases and potentially reduce the frequency of pesticide applications, thereby reducing the chemical