"The study offers contributions at theoretical and practical levels. The theoretical contributions are as follows. First, this study further expands the literature related to digital technology and enterprise green development and explores the impact of AI on enterprise green development as a typical digital technology, which contributes to exploring the driving factors of enterprise green development and provides theoretical evidence for enterprises to promote green development, with the support of digital technology. It also expands research on the outcome effects of AI technology applications. Second, rather than using a single indicator to measure the green development level of enterprises, this study applies the super-SBM model to comprehensively incorporate the input–output indicators related to the green development of enterprises and calculates the GTFP of enterprises, which enriches the measurement basis of their green development capability. Third, research on GTFP is mostly focused on the regional development level, which means that GTFP is studied from a macroscopic perspective, such as provinces, cities, and industries, but is rarely explored at the microscopic level. This study focuses on the relationship between AI and enterprise GTFP at an individual enterprise level, which broadens the understanding of the driving factors behind green total a microscopic perspective. Finally, this study focuses on the indirect effects of slack resources in enterprises, classifies slack resources into absorbed, unabsorbed, and potential slack, in accordance with existing criteria, and it investigates their moderating effects on AI and GTFP. The results revealed the applicability of different types of slack resources in the strategic development of enterprises and facilitating a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between digital technology and enterprise green development. The practical contributions are as follows. At the macro level, the research findings verify the accuracy of vigorous AI development, offer directional guidance for the policy formulation of relevant digital technology development, and provide reference to the management and guidance of the government and relevant departments regarding digitalization. At the micro level, the research findings point in the direction of development of AI technology and provide a reference for enterprises to promote GTFP and enhance green development capability. Simultaneously, research findings on slack resources also contribute to rational resource allocation for enterprises in order to adapt to their strategic development. 5.4. limitations and future research As the models, methods, and data involved in this study are limited, the findings may have limitations. To further indicate possible future research directions, this study has identified the following shortcomings. First, the keyword lexicon of AI technology applications constructed in this study is based on the development